by the side of a wood , in a country a long way off , ran a fine stream of water ; and upon the stream there stood a mill . the miller ' s house was close by , and the miller , you must know , had a very beautiful daughter . she was , moreover , very shrewd and clever ; and the miller was so proud of her , that he one day told the king of the land , who used to come and hunt in the wood , that his daughter could spin gold out of straw . now this king was very fond of money ; and when he heard the miller ' s boast his greediness was raised , and he sent for the girl to be brought before him . then he led her to a chamber in his palace where there was a great heap of straw , and gave her a spinning-wheel , and said , ' all this must be spun into gold before morning , as you love your life . ' it was in vain that the poor maiden said that it was only a silly boast of her father , for that she could do no such thing as spin straw into gold : the chamber door was locked , and she was left alone . she sat down in one corner of the room , and began to bewail her hard fate ; when on a sudden the door opened , and a droll-looking little man hobbled in , and said , ' good morrow to you , my good lass ; what are you weeping for ? ' ' alas ! ' said she , ' i must spin this straw into gold , and i know not how . ' ' what will you give me , ' said the hobgoblin , ' to do it for you ? ' ' my necklace , ' replied the maiden . he took her at her word , and sat himself down to the wheel , and whistled and sang : ' round about , round about , lo and behold ! reel away , reel away , straw into gold ! ' and round about the wheel went merrily ; the work was quickly done , and the straw was all spun into gold . when the king came and saw this , he was greatly astonished and pleased ; but his heart grew still more greedy of gain , and he shut up the poor miller ' s daughter again with a fresh task . then she knew not what to do , and sat down once more to weep ; but the dwarf soon opened the door , and said , ' what will you give me to do your task ? ' ' the ring on my finger , ' said she . so her little friend took the ring , and began to work at the wheel again , and whistled and sang : ' round about , round about , lo and behold ! reel away , reel away , straw into gold ! ' till , long before morning , all was done again . the king was greatly delighted to see all this glittering treasure ; but still he had not enough : so he took the miller ' s daughter to a yet larger heap , and said , ' all this must be spun tonight ; and if it is , you shall be my queen . ' as soon as she was alone that dwarf came in , and said , ' what will you give me to spin gold for you this third time ? ' ' i have nothing left , ' said she . ' then say you will give me , ' said the little man , ' the first little child that you may have when you are queen . ' ' that may never be , ' thought the miller ' s daughter : and as she knew no other way to get her task done , she said she would do what he asked . round went the wheel again to the old song , and the manikin once more spun the heap into gold . the king came in the morning , and , finding all he wanted , was forced to keep his word ; so he married the miller ' s daughter , and she really became queen . at the birth of her first little child she was very glad , and forgot the dwarf , and what she had said . but one day he came into her room , where she was sitting playing with her baby , and put her in mind of it . then she grieved sorely at her misfortune , and said she would give him all the wealth of the kingdom if he would let her off , but in vain ; till at last her tears softened him , and he said , ' i will give you three days ' grace , and if during that time you tell me my name , you shall keep your child . ' now the queen lay awake all night , thinking of all the odd names that she had ever heard ; and she sent messengers all over the land to find out new ones . the next day the little man came , and she began with timothy , ichabod , benjamin , jeremiah , and all the names she could remember ; but to all and each of them he said , ' madam , that is not my name . ' the second day she began with all the comical names she could hear of , bandy-legs , hunchback , crook-shanks , and so on ; but the little gentleman still said to every one of them , ' madam , that is not my name . ' the third day one of the messengers came back , and said , ' i have travelled two days without hearing of any other names ; but yesterday , as i was climbing a high hill , among the trees of the forest where the fox and the hare bid each other good night , i saw a little hut ; and before the hut burnt a fire ; and round about the fire a funny little dwarf was dancing upon one leg , and singing : " merrily the feast i ' ll make . today i ' ll brew , tomorrow bake ; merrily i ' ll dance and sing , for next day will a stranger bring . little does my lady dream rumpelstiltskin is my name ! " when the queen heard this she jumped for joy , and as soon as her little friend came she sat down upon her throne , and called all her court round to enjoy the fun ; and the nurse stood by her side with the baby in her arms , as if it was quite ready to be given up . then the little man began to chuckle at the thought of having the poor child , to take home with him to his hut in the woods ; and he cried out , ' now , lady , what is my name ? ' ' is it john ? ' asked she . ' no , madam ! ' ' is it tom ? ' ' no , madam ! ' ' is it jemmy ? ' ' it is not . ' ' can your name be rumpelstiltskin ? ' said the lady slyly . ' some witch told you that ! --some witch told you that ! ' cried the little man , and dashed his right foot in a rage so deep into the floor , that he was forced to lay hold of it with both hands to pull it out . then he made the best of his way off , while the nurse laughed and the baby crowed ; and all the court jeered at him for having had so much trouble for nothing , and said , ' we wish you a very good morning , and a merry feast , mr rumplestiltskin ! '