as a merry young huntsman was once going briskly along through a wood , there came up a little old woman , and said to him , ' good day , good day ; you seem merry enough , but i am hungry and thirsty ; do pray give me something to eat . ' the huntsman took pity on her , and put his hand in his pocket and gave her what he had . then he wanted to go his way ; but she took hold of him , and said , ' listen , my friend , to what i am going to tell you ; i will reward you for your kindness ; go your way , and after a little time you will come to a tree where you will see nine birds sitting on a cloak . shoot into the midst of them , and one will fall down dead : the cloak will fall too ; take it , it is a wishing-cloak , and when you wear it you will find yourself at any place where you may wish to be . cut open the dead bird , take out its heart and keep it , and you will find a piece of gold under your pillow every morning when you rise . it is the bird ' s heart that will bring you this good luck . ' the huntsman thanked her , and thought to himself , ' if all this does happen , it will be a fine thing for me . ' when he had gone a hundred steps or so , he heard a screaming and chirping in the branches over him , and looked up and saw a flock of birds pulling a cloak with their bills and feet ; screaming , fighting , and tugging at each other as if each wished to have it himself . ' well , ' said the huntsman , ' this is wonderful ; this happens just as the old woman said ' ; then he shot into the midst of them so that their feathers flew all about . off went the flock chattering away ; but one fell down dead , and the cloak with it . then the huntsman did as the old woman told him , cut open the bird , took out the heart , and carried the cloak home with him . the next morning when he awoke he lifted up his pillow , and there lay the piece of gold glittering underneath ; the same happened next day , and indeed every day when he arose . he heaped up a great deal of gold , and at last thought to himself , ' of what use is this gold to me whilst i am at home ? i will go out into the world and look about me . ' then he took leave of his friends , and hung his bag and bow about his neck , and went his way . it so happened that his road one day led through a thick wood , at the end of which was a large castle in a green meadow , and at one of the windows stood an old woman with a very beautiful young lady by her side looking about them . now the old woman was a witch , and said to the young lady , ' there is a young man coming out of the wood who carries a wonderful prize ; we must get it away from him , my dear child , for it is more fit for us than for him . he has a bird ' s heart that brings a piece of gold under his pillow every morning . ' meantime the huntsman came nearer and looked at the lady , and said to himself , ' i have been travelling so long that i should like to go into this castle and rest myself , for i have money enough to pay for anything i want ' ; but the real reason was , that he wanted to see more of the beautiful lady . then he went into the house , and was welcomed kindly ; and it was not long before he was so much in love that he thought of nothing else but looking at the lady ' s eyes , and doing everything that she wished . then the old woman said , ' now is the time for getting the bird ' s heart . ' so the lady stole it away , and he never found any more gold under his pillow , for it lay now under the young lady ' s , and the old woman took it away every morning ; but he was so much in love that he never missed his prize . ' well , ' said the old witch , ' we have got the bird ' s heart , but not the wishing-cloak yet , and that we must also get . ' ' let us leave him that , ' said the young lady ; ' he has already lost his wealth . ' then the witch was very angry , and said , ' such a cloak is a very rare and wonderful thing , and i must and will have it . ' so she did as the old woman told her , and set herself at the window , and looked about the country and seemed very sorrowful ; then the huntsman said , ' what makes you so sad ? ' ' alas ! dear sir , ' said she , ' yonder lies the granite rock where all the costly diamonds grow , and i want so much to go there , that whenever i think of it i cannot help being sorrowful , for who can reach it ? only the birds and the flies--man cannot . ' ' if that ' s all your grief , ' said the huntsman , ' i ' ll take you there with all my heart ' ; so he drew her under his cloak , and the moment he wished to be on the granite mountain they were both there . the diamonds glittered so on all sides that they were delighted with the sight and picked up the finest . but the old witch made a deep sleep come upon him , and he said to the young lady , ' let us sit down and rest ourselves a little , i am so tired that i cannot stand any longer . ' so they sat down , and he laid his head in her lap and fell asleep ; and whilst he was sleeping on she took the cloak from his shoulders , hung it on her own , picked up the diamonds , and wished herself home again . when he awoke and found that his lady had tricked him , and left him alone on the wild rock , he said , ' alas ! what roguery there is in the world ! ' and there he sat in great grief and fear , not knowing what to do . now this rock belonged to fierce giants who lived upon it ; and as he saw three of them striding about , he thought to himself , ' i can only save myself by feigning to be asleep ' ; so he laid himself down as if he were in a sound sleep . when the giants came up to him , the first pushed him with his foot , and said , ' what worm is this that lies here curled up ? ' ' tread upon him and kill him , ' said the second . ' it ' s not worth the trouble , ' said the third ; ' let him live , he ' ll go climbing higher up the mountain , and some cloud will come rolling and carry him away . ' and they passed on . but the huntsman had heard all they said ; and as soon as they were gone , he climbed to the top of the mountain , and when he had sat there a short time a cloud came rolling around him , and caught him in a whirlwind and bore him along for some time , till it settled in a garden , and he fell quite gently to the ground amongst the greens and cabbages . then he looked around him , and said , ' i wish i had something to eat , if not i shall be worse off than before ; for here i see neither apples nor pears , nor any kind of fruits , nothing but vegetables . ' at last he thought to himself , ' i can eat salad , it will refresh and strengthen me . ' so he picked out a fine head and ate of it ; but scarcely had he swallowed two bites when he felt himself quite changed , and saw with horror that he was turned into an ass . however , he still felt very hungry , and the salad tasted very nice ; so he ate on till he came to another kind of salad , and scarcely had he tasted it when he felt another change come over him , and soon saw that he was lucky enough to have found his old shape again . then he laid himself down and slept off a little of his weariness ; and when he awoke the next morning he broke off a head both of the good and the bad salad , and thought to himself , ' this will help me to my fortune again , and enable me to pay off some folks for their treachery . ' so he went away to try and find the castle of his friends ; and after wandering about a few days he luckily found it . then he stained his face all over brown , so that even his mother would not have known him , and went into the castle and asked for a lodging ; ' i am so tired , ' said he , ' that i can go no farther . ' ' countryman , ' said the witch , ' who are you ? and what is your business ? ' ' i am , ' said he , ' a messenger sent by the king to find the finest salad that grows under the sun . i have been lucky enough to find it , and have brought it with me ; but the heat of the sun scorches so that it begins to wither , and i don ' t know that i can carry it farther . ' when the witch and the young lady heard of his beautiful salad , they longed to taste it , and said , ' dear countryman , let us just taste it . ' ' to be sure , ' answered he ; ' i have two heads of it with me , and will give you one ' ; so he opened his bag and gave them the bad . then the witch herself took it into the kitchen to be dressed ; and when it was ready she could not wait till it was carried up , but took a few leaves immediately and put them in her mouth , and scarcely were they swallowed when she lost her own form and ran braying down into the court in the form of an ass . now the servant-maid came into the kitchen , and seeing the salad ready , was going to carry it up ; but on the way she too felt a wish to taste it as the old woman had done , and ate some leaves ; so she also was turned into an ass and ran after the other , letting the dish with the salad fall on the ground . the messenger sat all this time with the beautiful young lady , and as nobody came with the salad and she longed to taste it , she said , ' i don ' t know where the salad can be . ' then he thought something must have happened , and said , ' i will go into the kitchen and see . ' and as he went he saw two asses in the court running about , and the salad lying on the ground . ' all right ! ' said he ; ' those two have had their share . ' then he took up the rest of the leaves , laid them on the dish and brought them to the young lady , saying , ' i bring you the dish myself that you may not wait any longer . ' so she ate of it , and like the others ran off into the court braying away . then the huntsman washed his face and went into the court that they might know him . ' now you shall be paid for your roguery , ' said he ; and tied them all three to a rope and took them along with him till he came to a mill and knocked at the window . ' what ' s the matter ? ' said the miller . ' i have three tiresome beasts here , ' said the other ; ' if you will take them , give them food and room , and treat them as i tell you , i will pay you whatever you ask . ' ' with all my heart , ' said the miller ; ' but how shall i treat them ? ' then the huntsman said , ' give the old one stripes three times a day and hay once ; give the next ( who was the servant-maid ) stripes once a day and hay three times ; and give the youngest ( who was the beautiful lady ) hay three times a day and no stripes ' : for he could not find it in his heart to have her beaten . after this he went back to the castle , where he found everything he wanted . some days after , the miller came to him and told him that the old ass was dead ; ' the other two , ' said he , ' are alive and eat , but are so sorrowful that they cannot last long . ' then the huntsman pitied them , and told the miller to drive them back to him , and when they came , he gave them some of the good salad to eat . and the beautiful young lady fell upon her knees before him , and said , ' o dearest huntsman ! forgive me all the ill i have done you ; my mother forced me to it , it was against my will , for i always loved you very much . your wishing-cloak hangs up in the closet , and as for the bird ' s heart , i will give it you too . ' but he said , ' keep it , it will be just the same thing , for i mean to make you my wife . ' so they were married , and lived together very happily till they died . the story of the youth who went forth to learn what fear was a certain father had two sons , the elder of who was smart and sensible , and could do everything , but the younger was stupid and could neither learn nor understand anything , and when people saw him they said : ' there ' s a fellow who will give his father some trouble ! ' when anything had to be done , it was always the elder who was forced to do it ; but if his father bade him fetch anything when it was late , or in the night-time , and the way led through the churchyard , or any other dismal place , he answered : ' oh , no father , i ' ll not go there , it makes me shudder ! ' for he was afraid . or when stories were told by the fire at night which made the flesh creep , the listeners sometimes said : ' oh , it makes us shudder ! ' the younger sat in a corner and listened with the rest of them , and could not imagine what they could mean . ' they are always saying : " it makes me shudder , it makes me shudder ! " it does not make me shudder , ' thought he . ' that , too , must be an art of which i understand nothing ! ' now it came to pass that his father said to him one day : ' hearken to me , you fellow in the corner there , you are growing tall and strong , and you too must learn something by which you can earn your bread . look how your brother works , but you do not even earn your salt . ' ' well , father , ' he replied , ' i am quite willing to learn something--indeed , if it could but be managed , i should like to learn how to shudder . i don ' t understand that at all yet . ' the elder brother smiled when he heard that , and thought to himself : ' goodness , what a blockhead that brother of mine is ! he will never be good for anything as long as he lives ! he who wants to be a sickle must bend himself betimes . ' the father sighed , and answered him : ' you shall soon learn what it is to shudder , but you will not earn your bread by that . ' soon after this the sexton came to the house on a visit , and the father bewailed his trouble , and told him how his younger son was so backward in every respect that he knew nothing and learnt nothing . ' just think , ' said he , ' when i asked him how he was going to earn his bread , he actually wanted to learn to shudder . ' ' if that be all , ' replied the sexton , ' he can learn that with me . send him to me , and i will soon polish him . ' the father was glad to do it , for he thought : ' it will train the boy a little . ' the sexton therefore took him into his house , and he had to ring the church bell . after a day or two , the sexton awoke him at midnight , and bade him arise and go up into the church tower and ring the bell . ' you shall soon learn what shuddering is , ' thought he , and secretly went there before him ; and when the boy was at the top of the tower and turned round , and was just going to take hold of the bell rope , he saw a white figure standing on the stairs opposite the sounding hole . ' who is there ? ' cried he , but the figure made no reply , and did not move or stir . ' give an answer , ' cried the boy , ' or take yourself off , you have no business here at night . ' the sexton , however , remained standing motionless that the boy might think he was a ghost . the boy cried a second time : ' what do you want here ? --speak if you are an honest fellow , or i will throw you down the steps ! ' the sexton thought : ' he can ' t mean to be as bad as his words , ' uttered no sound and stood as if he were made of stone . then the boy called to him for the third time , and as that was also to no purpose , he ran against him and pushed the ghost down the stairs , so that it fell down the ten steps and remained lying there in a corner . thereupon he rang the bell , went home , and without saying a word went to bed , and fell asleep . the sexton ' s wife waited a long time for her husband , but he did not come back . at length she became uneasy , and wakened the boy , and asked : ' do you know where my husband is ? he climbed up the tower before you did . ' ' no , i don ' t know , ' replied the boy , ' but someone was standing by the sounding hole on the other side of the steps , and as he would neither give an answer nor go away , i took him for a scoundrel , and threw him downstairs . just go there and you will see if it was he . i should be sorry if it were . ' the woman ran away and found her husband , who was lying moaning in the corner , and had broken his leg . she carried him down , and then with loud screams she hastened to the boy ' s father , ' your boy , ' cried she , ' has been the cause of a great misfortune ! he has thrown my husband down the steps so that he broke his leg . take the good-for-nothing fellow out of our house . ' the father was terrified , and ran thither and scolded the boy . ' what wicked tricks are these ? ' said he . ' the devil must have put them into your head . ' ' father , ' he replied , ' do listen to me . i am quite innocent . he was standing there by night like one intent on doing evil . i did not know who it was , and i entreated him three times either to speak or to go away . ' ' ah , ' said the father , ' i have nothing but unhappiness with you . go out of my sight . i will see you no more . ' ' yes , father , right willingly , wait only until it is day . then will i go forth and learn how to shudder , and then i shall , at any rate , understand one art which will support me . ' ' learn what you will , ' spoke the father , ' it is all the same to me . here are fifty talers for you . take these and go into the wide world , and tell no one from whence you come , and who is your father , for i have reason to be ashamed of you . ' ' yes , father , it shall be as you will . if you desire nothing more than that , i can easily keep it in mind . ' when the day dawned , therefore , the boy put his fifty talers into his pocket , and went forth on the great highway , and continually said to himself : ' if i could but shudder ! if i could but shudder ! ' then a man approached who heard this conversation which the youth was holding with himself , and when they had walked a little farther to where they could see the gallows , the man said to him : ' look , there is the tree where seven men have married the ropemaker ' s daughter , and are now learning how to fly . sit down beneath it , and wait till night comes , and you will soon learn how to shudder . ' ' if that is all that is wanted , ' answered the youth , ' it is easily done ; but if i learn how to shudder as fast as that , you shall have my fifty talers . just come back to me early in the morning . ' then the youth went to the gallows , sat down beneath it , and waited till evening came . and as he was cold , he lighted himself a fire , but at midnight the wind blew so sharply that in spite of his fire , he could not get warm . and as the wind knocked the hanged men against each other , and they moved backwards and forwards , he thought to himself : ' if you shiver below by the fire , how those up above must freeze and suffer ! ' and as he felt pity for them , he raised the ladder , and climbed up , unbound one of them after the other , and brought down all seven . then he stoked the fire , blew it , and set them all round it to warm themselves . but they sat there and did not stir , and the fire caught their clothes . so he said : ' take care , or i will hang you up again . ' the dead men , however , did not hear , but were quite silent , and let their rags go on burning . at this he grew angry , and said : ' if you will not take care , i cannot help you , i will not be burnt with you , ' and he hung them up again each in his turn . then he sat down by his fire and fell asleep , and the next morning the man came to him and wanted to have the fifty talers , and said : ' well do you know how to shudder ? ' ' no , ' answered he , ' how should i know ? those fellows up there did not open their mouths , and were so stupid that they let the few old rags which they had on their bodies get burnt . ' then the man saw that he would not get the fifty talers that day , and went away saying : ' such a youth has never come my way before . ' the youth likewise went his way , and once more began to mutter to himself : ' ah , if i could but shudder ! ah , if i could but shudder ! ' a waggoner who was striding behind him heard this and asked : ' who are you ? ' ' i don ' t know , ' answered the youth . then the waggoner asked : ' from whence do you come ? ' ' i know not . ' ' who is your father ? ' ' that i may not tell you . ' ' what is it that you are always muttering between your teeth ? ' ' ah , ' replied the youth , ' i do so wish i could shudder , but no one can teach me how . ' ' enough of your foolish chatter , ' said the waggoner . ' come , go with me , i will see about a place for you . ' the youth went with the waggoner , and in the evening they arrived at an inn where they wished to pass the night . then at the entrance of the parlour the youth again said quite loudly : ' if i could but shudder ! if i could but shudder ! ' the host who heard this , laughed and said : ' if that is your desire , there ought to be a good opportunity for you here . ' ' ah , be silent , ' said the hostess , ' so many prying persons have already lost their lives , it would be a pity and a shame if such beautiful eyes as these should never see the daylight again . ' but the youth said : ' however difficult it may be , i will learn it . for this purpose indeed have i journeyed forth . ' he let the host have no rest , until the latter told him , that not far from thence stood a haunted castle where anyone could very easily learn what shuddering was , if he would but watch in it for three nights . the king had promised that he who would venture should have his daughter to wife , and she was the most beautiful maiden the sun shone on . likewise in the castle lay great treasures , which were guarded by evil spirits , and these treasures would then be freed , and would make a poor man rich enough . already many men had gone into the castle , but as yet none had come out again . then the youth went next morning to the king , and said : ' if it be allowed , i will willingly watch three nights in the haunted castle . ' the king looked at him , and as the youth pleased him , he said : ' you may ask for three things to take into the castle with you , but they must be things without life . ' then he answered : ' then i ask for a fire , a turning lathe , and a cutting-board with the knife . ' the king had these things carried into the castle for him during the day . when night was drawing near , the youth went up and made himself a bright fire in one of the rooms , placed the cutting-board and knife beside it , and seated himself by the turning-lathe . ' ah , if i could but shudder ! ' said he , ' but i shall not learn it here either . ' towards midnight he was about to poke his fire , and as he was blowing it , something cried suddenly from one corner : ' au , miau ! how cold we are ! ' ' you fools ! ' cried he , ' what are you crying about ? if you are cold , come and take a seat by the fire and warm yourselves . ' and when he had said that , two great black cats came with one tremendous leap and sat down on each side of him , and looked savagely at him with their fiery eyes . after a short time , when they had warmed themselves , they said : ' comrade , shall we have a game of cards ? ' ' why not ? ' he replied , ' but just show me your paws . ' then they stretched out their claws . ' oh , ' said he , ' what long nails you have ! wait , i must first cut them for you . ' thereupon he seized them by the throats , put them on the cutting-board and screwed their feet fast . ' i have looked at your fingers , ' said he , ' and my fancy for card-playing has gone , ' and he struck them dead and threw them out into the water . but when he had made away with these two , and was about to sit down again by his fire , out from every hole and corner came black cats and black dogs with red-hot chains , and more and more of them came until he could no longer move , and they yelled horribly , and got on his fire , pulled it to pieces , and tried to put it out . he watched them for a while quietly , but at last when they were going too far , he seized his cutting-knife , and cried : ' away with you , vermin , ' and began to cut them down . some of them ran away , the others he killed , and threw out into the fish-pond . when he came back he fanned the embers of his fire again and warmed himself . and as he thus sat , his eyes would keep open no longer , and he felt a desire to sleep . then he looked round and saw a great bed in the corner . ' that is the very thing for me , ' said he , and got into it . when he was just going to shut his eyes , however , the bed began to move of its own accord , and went over the whole of the castle . ' that ' s right , ' said he , ' but go faster . ' then the bed rolled on as if six horses were harnessed to it , up and down , over thresholds and stairs , but suddenly hop , hop , it turned over upside down , and lay on him like a mountain . but he threw quilts and pillows up in the air , got out and said : ' now anyone who likes , may drive , ' and lay down by his fire , and slept till it was day . in the morning the king came , and when he saw him lying there on the ground , he thought the evil spirits had killed him and he was dead . then said he : ' after all it is a pity , --for so handsome a man . ' the youth heard it , got up , and said : ' it has not come to that yet . ' then the king was astonished , but very glad , and asked how he had fared . ' very well indeed , ' answered he ; ' one night is past , the two others will pass likewise . ' then he went to the innkeeper , who opened his eyes very wide , and said : ' i never expected to see you alive again ! have you learnt how to shudder yet ? ' ' no , ' said he , ' it is all in vain . if someone would but tell me ! ' the second night he again went up into the old castle , sat down by the fire , and once more began his old song : ' if i could but shudder ! ' when midnight came , an uproar and noise of tumbling about was heard ; at first it was low , but it grew louder and louder . then it was quiet for a while , and at length with a loud scream , half a man came down the chimney and fell before him . ' hullo ! ' cried he , ' another half belongs to this . this is not enough ! ' then the uproar began again , there was a roaring and howling , and the other half fell down likewise . ' wait , ' said he , ' i will just stoke up the fire a little for you . ' when he had done that and looked round again , the two pieces were joined together , and a hideous man was sitting in his place . ' that is no part of our bargain , ' said the youth , ' the bench is mine . ' the man wanted to push him away ; the youth , however , would not allow that , but thrust him off with all his strength , and seated himself again in his own place . then still more men fell down , one after the other ; they brought nine dead men ' s legs and two skulls , and set them up and played at nine-pins with them . the youth also wanted to play and said : ' listen you , can i join you ? ' ' yes , if you have any money . ' ' money enough , ' replied he , ' but your balls are not quite round . ' then he took the skulls and put them in the lathe and turned them till they were round . ' there , now they will roll better ! ' said he . ' hurrah ! now we ' ll have fun ! ' he played with them and lost some of his money , but when it struck twelve , everything vanished from his sight . he lay down and quietly fell asleep . next morning the king came to inquire after him . ' how has it fared with you this time ? ' asked he . ' i have been playing at nine-pins , ' he answered , ' and have lost a couple of farthings . ' ' have you not shuddered then ? ' ' what ? ' said he , ' i have had a wonderful time ! if i did but know what it was to shudder ! ' the third night he sat down again on his bench and said quite sadly : ' if i could but shudder . ' when it grew late , six tall men came in and brought a coffin . then he said : ' ha , ha , that is certainly my little cousin , who died only a few days ago , ' and he beckoned with his finger , and cried : ' come , little cousin , come . ' they placed the coffin on the ground , but he went to it and took the lid off , and a dead man lay therein . he felt his face , but it was cold as ice . ' wait , ' said he , ' i will warm you a little , ' and went to the fire and warmed his hand and laid it on the dead man ' s face , but he remained cold . then he took him out , and sat down by the fire and laid him on his breast and rubbed his arms that the blood might circulate again . as this also did no good , he thought to himself : ' when two people lie in bed together , they warm each other , ' and carried him to the bed , covered him over and lay down by him . after a short time the dead man became warm too , and began to move . then said the youth , ' see , little cousin , have i not warmed you ? ' the dead man , however , got up and cried : ' now will i strangle you . ' ' what ! ' said he , ' is that the way you thank me ? you shall at once go into your coffin again , ' and he took him up , threw him into it , and shut the lid . then came the six men and carried him away again . ' i cannot manage to shudder , ' said he . ' i shall never learn it here as long as i live . ' then a man entered who was taller than all others , and looked terrible . he was old , however , and had a long white beard . ' you wretch , ' cried he , ' you shall soon learn what it is to shudder , for you shall die . ' ' not so fast , ' replied the youth . ' if i am to die , i shall have to have a say in it . ' ' i will soon seize you , ' said the fiend . ' softly , softly , do not talk so big . i am as strong as you are , and perhaps even stronger . ' ' we shall see , ' said the old man . ' if you are stronger , i will let you go--come , we will try . ' then he led him by dark passages to a smith ' s forge , took an axe , and with one blow struck an anvil into the ground . ' i can do better than that , ' said the youth , and went to the other anvil . the old man placed himself near and wanted to look on , and his white beard hung down . then the youth seized the axe , split the anvil with one blow , and in it caught the old man ' s beard . ' now i have you , ' said the youth . ' now it is your turn to die . ' then he seized an iron bar and beat the old man till he moaned and entreated him to stop , when he would give him great riches . the youth drew out the axe and let him go . the old man led him back into the castle , and in a cellar showed him three chests full of gold . ' of these , ' said he , ' one part is for the poor , the other for the king , the third yours . ' in the meantime it struck twelve , and the spirit disappeared , so that the youth stood in darkness . ' i shall still be able to find my way out , ' said he , and felt about , found the way into the room , and slept there by his fire . next morning the king came and said : ' now you must have learnt what shuddering is ? ' ' no , ' he answered ; ' what can it be ? my dead cousin was here , and a bearded man came and showed me a great deal of money down below , but no one told me what it was to shudder . ' ' then , ' said the king , ' you have saved the castle , and shall marry my daughter . ' ' that is all very well , ' said he , ' but still i do not know what it is to shudder ! ' then the gold was brought up and the wedding celebrated ; but howsoever much the young king loved his wife , and however happy he was , he still said always : ' if i could but shudder--if i could but shudder . ' and this at last angered her . her waiting-maid said : ' i will find a cure for him ; he shall soon learn what it is to shudder . ' she went out to the stream which flowed through the garden , and had a whole bucketful of gudgeons brought to her . at night when the young king was sleeping , his wife was to draw the clothes off him and empty the bucket full of cold water with the gudgeons in it over him , so that the little fishes would sprawl about him . then he woke up and cried : ' oh , what makes me shudder so ? --what makes me shudder so , dear wife ? ah ! now i know what it is to shudder ! '