a poor woodman sat in his cottage one night , smoking his pipe by the fireside , while his wife sat by his side spinning . ' how lonely it is , wife , ' said he , as he puffed out a long curl of smoke , ' for you and me to sit here by ourselves , without any children to play about and amuse us while other people seem so happy and merry with their children ! ' ' what you say is very true , ' said the wife , sighing , and turning round her wheel ; ' how happy should i be if i had but one child ! if it were ever so small--nay , if it were no bigger than my thumb--i should be very happy , and love it dearly . ' now--odd as you may think it--it came to pass that this good woman ' s wish was fulfilled , just in the very way she had wished it ; for , not long afterwards , she had a little boy , who was quite healthy and strong , but was not much bigger than my thumb . so they said , ' well , we cannot say we have not got what we wished for , and , little as he is , we will love him dearly . ' and they called him thomas thumb . they gave him plenty of food , yet for all they could do he never grew bigger , but kept just the same size as he had been when he was born . still , his eyes were sharp and sparkling , and he soon showed himself to be a clever little fellow , who always knew well what he was about . one day , as the woodman was getting ready to go into the wood to cut fuel , he said , ' i wish i had someone to bring the cart after me , for i want to make haste . ' ' oh , father , ' cried tom , ' i will take care of that ; the cart shall be in the wood by the time you want it . ' then the woodman laughed , and said , ' how can that be ? you cannot reach up to the horse ' s bridle . ' ' never mind that , father , ' said tom ; ' if my mother will only harness the horse , i will get into his ear and tell him which way to go . ' ' well , ' said the father , ' we will try for once . ' when the time came the mother harnessed the horse to the cart , and put tom into his ear ; and as he sat there the little man told the beast how to go , crying out , ' go on ! ' and ' stop ! ' as he wanted : and thus the horse went on just as well as if the woodman had driven it himself into the wood . it happened that as the horse was going a little too fast , and tom was calling out , ' gently ! gently ! ' two strangers came up . ' what an odd thing that is ! ' said one : ' there is a cart going along , and i hear a carter talking to the horse , but yet i can see no one . ' ' that is queer , indeed , ' said the other ; ' let us follow the cart , and see where it goes . ' so they went on into the wood , till at last they came to the place where the woodman was . then tom thumb , seeing his father , cried out , ' see , father , here i am with the cart , all right and safe ! now take me down ! ' so his father took hold of the horse with one hand , and with the other took his son out of the horse ' s ear , and put him down upon a straw , where he sat as merry as you please . the two strangers were all this time looking on , and did not know what to say for wonder . at last one took the other aside , and said , ' that little urchin will make our fortune , if we can get him , and carry him about from town to town as a show ; we must buy him . ' so they went up to the woodman , and asked him what he would take for the little man . ' he will be better off , ' said they , ' with us than with you . ' ' i won ' t sell him at all , ' said the father ; ' my own flesh and blood is dearer to me than all the silver and gold in the world . ' but tom , hearing of the bargain they wanted to make , crept up his father ' s coat to his shoulder and whispered in his ear , ' take the money , father , and let them have me ; i ' ll soon come back to you . ' so the woodman at last said he would sell tom to the strangers for a large piece of gold , and they paid the price . ' where would you like to sit ? ' said one of them . ' oh , put me on the rim of your hat ; that will be a nice gallery for me ; i can walk about there and see the country as we go along . ' so they did as he wished ; and when tom had taken leave of his father they took him away with them . they journeyed on till it began to be dusky , and then the little man said , ' let me get down , i ' m tired . ' so the man took off his hat , and put him down on a clod of earth , in a ploughed field by the side of the road . but tom ran about amongst the furrows , and at last slipped into an old mouse-hole . ' good night , my masters ! ' said he , ' i ' m off ! mind and look sharp after me the next time . ' then they ran at once to the place , and poked the ends of their sticks into the mouse-hole , but all in vain ; tom only crawled farther and farther in ; and at last it became quite dark , so that they were forced to go their way without their prize , as sulky as could be . when tom found they were gone , he came out of his hiding-place . ' what dangerous walking it is , ' said he , ' in this ploughed field ! if i were to fall from one of these great clods , i should undoubtedly break my neck . ' at last , by good luck , he found a large empty snail-shell . ' this is lucky , ' said he , ' i can sleep here very well ' ; and in he crept . just as he was falling asleep , he heard two men passing by , chatting together ; and one said to the other , ' how can we rob that rich parson ' s house of his silver and gold ? ' ' i ' ll tell you ! ' cried tom . ' what noise was that ? ' said the thief , frightened ; ' i ' m sure i heard someone speak . ' they stood still listening , and tom said , ' take me with you , and i ' ll soon show you how to get the parson ' s money . ' ' but where are you ? ' said they . ' look about on the ground , ' answered he , ' and listen where the sound comes from . ' at last the thieves found him out , and lifted him up in their hands . ' you little urchin ! ' they said , ' what can you do for us ? ' ' why , i can get between the iron window-bars of the parson ' s house , and throw you out whatever you want . ' ' that ' s a good thought , ' said the thieves ; ' come along , we shall see what you can do . ' when they came to the parson ' s house , tom slipped through the window-bars into the room , and then called out as loud as he could bawl , ' will you have all that is here ? ' at this the thieves were frightened , and said , ' softly , softly ! speak low , that you may not awaken anybody . ' but tom seemed as if he did not understand them , and bawled out again , ' how much will you have ? shall i throw it all out ? ' now the cook lay in the next room ; and hearing a noise she raised herself up in her bed and listened . meantime the thieves were frightened , and ran off a little way ; but at last they plucked up their hearts , and said , ' the little urchin is only trying to make fools of us . ' so they came back and whispered softly to him , saying , ' now let us have no more of your roguish jokes ; but throw us out some of the money . ' then tom called out as loud as he could , ' very well ! hold your hands ! here it comes . ' the cook heard this quite plain , so she sprang out of bed , and ran to open the door . the thieves ran off as if a wolf was at their tails : and the maid , having groped about and found nothing , went away for a light . by the time she came back , tom had slipped off into the barn ; and when she had looked about and searched every hole and corner , and found nobody , she went to bed , thinking she must have been dreaming with her eyes open . the little man crawled about in the hay-loft , and at last found a snug place to finish his night ' s rest in ; so he laid himself down , meaning to sleep till daylight , and then find his way home to his father and mother . but alas ! how woefully he was undone ! what crosses and sorrows happen to us all in this world ! the cook got up early , before daybreak , to feed the cows ; and going straight to the hay-loft , carried away a large bundle of hay , with the little man in the middle of it , fast asleep . he still , however , slept on , and did not awake till he found himself in the mouth of the cow ; for the cook had put the hay into the cow ' s rick , and the cow had taken tom up in a mouthful of it . ' good lack-a-day ! ' said he , ' how came i to tumble into the mill ? ' but he soon found out where he really was ; and was forced to have all his wits about him , that he might not get between the cow ' s teeth , and so be crushed to death . at last down he went into her stomach . ' it is rather dark , ' said he ; ' they forgot to build windows in this room to let the sun in ; a candle would be no bad thing . ' though he made the best of his bad luck , he did not like his quarters at all ; and the worst of it was , that more and more hay was always coming down , and the space left for him became smaller and smaller . at last he cried out as loud as he could , ' don ' t bring me any more hay ! don ' t bring me any more hay ! ' the maid happened to be just then milking the cow ; and hearing someone speak , but seeing nobody , and yet being quite sure it was the same voice that she had heard in the night , she was so frightened that she fell off her stool , and overset the milk-pail . as soon as she could pick herself up out of the dirt , she ran off as fast as she could to her master the parson , and said , ' sir , sir , the cow is talking ! ' but the parson said , ' woman , thou art surely mad ! ' however , he went with her into the cow-house , to try and see what was the matter . scarcely had they set foot on the threshold , when tom called out , ' don ' t bring me any more hay ! ' then the parson himself was frightened ; and thinking the cow was surely bewitched , told his man to kill her on the spot . so the cow was killed , and cut up ; and the stomach , in which tom lay , was thrown out upon a dunghill . tom soon set himself to work to get out , which was not a very easy task ; but at last , just as he had made room to get his head out , fresh ill-luck befell him . a hungry wolf sprang out , and swallowed up the whole stomach , with tom in it , at one gulp , and ran away . tom , however , was still not disheartened ; and thinking the wolf would not dislike having some chat with him as he was going along , he called out , ' my good friend , i can show you a famous treat . ' ' where ' s that ? ' said the wolf . ' in such and such a house , ' said tom , describing his own father ' s house . ' you can crawl through the drain into the kitchen and then into the pantry , and there you will find cakes , ham , beef , cold chicken , roast pig , apple-dumplings , and everything that your heart can wish . ' the wolf did not want to be asked twice ; so that very night he went to the house and crawled through the drain into the kitchen , and then into the pantry , and ate and drank there to his heart ' s content . as soon as he had had enough he wanted to get away ; but he had eaten so much that he could not go out by the same way he came in . this was just what tom had reckoned upon ; and now he began to set up a great shout , making all the noise he could . ' will you be easy ? ' said the wolf ; ' you ' ll awaken everybody in the house if you make such a clatter . ' ' what ' s that to me ? ' said the little man ; ' you have had your frolic , now i ' ve a mind to be merry myself ' ; and he began , singing and shouting as loud as he could . the woodman and his wife , being awakened by the noise , peeped through a crack in the door ; but when they saw a wolf was there , you may well suppose that they were sadly frightened ; and the woodman ran for his axe , and gave his wife a scythe . ' do you stay behind , ' said the woodman , ' and when i have knocked him on the head you must rip him up with the scythe . ' tom heard all this , and cried out , ' father , father ! i am here , the wolf has swallowed me . ' and his father said , ' heaven be praised ! we have found our dear child again ' ; and he told his wife not to use the scythe for fear she should hurt him . then he aimed a great blow , and struck the wolf on the head , and killed him on the spot ! and when he was dead they cut open his body , and set tommy free . ' ah ! ' said the father , ' what fears we have had for you ! ' ' yes , father , ' answered he ; ' i have travelled all over the world , i think , in one way or other , since we parted ; and now i am very glad to come home and get fresh air again . ' ' why , where have you been ? ' said his father . ' i have been in a mouse-hole--and in a snail-shell--and down a cow ' s throat--and in the wolf ' s belly ; and yet here i am again , safe and sound . ' ' well , ' said they , ' you are come back , and we will not sell you again for all the riches in the world . ' then they hugged and kissed their dear little son , and gave him plenty to eat and drink , for he was very hungry ; and then they fetched new clothes for him , for his old ones had been quite spoiled on his journey . so master thumb stayed at home with his father and mother , in peace ; for though he had been so great a traveller , and had done and seen so many fine things , and was fond enough of telling the whole story , he always agreed that , after all , there ' s no place like home !