a certain cat had made the acquaintance of a mouse , and had said so much to her about the great love and friendship she felt for her , that at length the mouse agreed that they should live and keep house together . ' but we must make a provision for winter , or else we shall suffer from hunger , ' said the cat ; ' and you , little mouse , cannot venture everywhere , or you will be caught in a trap some day . ' the good advice was followed , and a pot of fat was bought , but they did not know where to put it . at length , after much consideration , the cat said : ' i know no place where it will be better stored up than in the church , for no one dares take anything away from there . we will set it beneath the altar , and not touch it until we are really in need of it . ' so the pot was placed in safety , but it was not long before the cat had a great yearning for it , and said to the mouse : ' i want to tell you something , little mouse ; my cousin has brought a little son into the world , and has asked me to be godmother ; he is white with brown spots , and i am to hold him over the font at the christening . let me go out today , and you look after the house by yourself . ' ' yes , yes , ' answered the mouse , ' by all means go , and if you get anything very good to eat , think of me . i should like a drop of sweet red christening wine myself . ' all this , however , was untrue ; the cat had no cousin , and had not been asked to be godmother . she went straight to the church , stole to the pot of fat , began to lick at it , and licked the top of the fat off . then she took a walk upon the roofs of the town , looked out for opportunities , and then stretched herself in the sun , and licked her lips whenever she thought of the pot of fat , and not until it was evening did she return home . ' well , here you are again , ' said the mouse , ' no doubt you have had a merry day . ' ' all went off well , ' answered the cat . ' what name did they give the child ? ' ' top off ! ' said the cat quite coolly . ' top off ! ' cried the mouse , ' that is a very odd and uncommon name , is it a usual one in your family ? ' ' what does that matter , ' said the cat , ' it is no worse than crumb-stealer , as your godchildren are called . ' before long the cat was seized by another fit of yearning . she said to the mouse : ' you must do me a favour , and once more manage the house for a day alone . i am again asked to be godmother , and , as the child has a white ring round its neck , i cannot refuse . ' the good mouse consented , but the cat crept behind the town walls to the church , and devoured half the pot of fat . ' nothing ever seems so good as what one keeps to oneself , ' said she , and was quite satisfied with her day ' s work . when she went home the mouse inquired : ' and what was the child christened ? ' ' half-done , ' answered the cat . ' half-done ! what are you saying ? i never heard the name in my life , i ' ll wager anything it is not in the calendar ! ' the cat ' s mouth soon began to water for some more licking . ' all good things go in threes , ' said she , ' i am asked to stand godmother again . the child is quite black , only it has white paws , but with that exception , it has not a single white hair on its whole body ; this only happens once every few years , you will let me go , won ' t you ? ' ' top-off ! half-done ! ' answered the mouse , ' they are such odd names , they make me very thoughtful . ' ' you sit at home , ' said the cat , ' in your dark-grey fur coat and long tail , and are filled with fancies , that ' s because you do not go out in the daytime . ' during the cat ' s absence the mouse cleaned the house , and put it in order , but the greedy cat entirely emptied the pot of fat . ' when everything is eaten up one has some peace , ' said she to herself , and well filled and fat she did not return home till night . the mouse at once asked what name had been given to the third child . ' it will not please you more than the others , ' said the cat . ' he is called all-gone . ' ' all-gone , ' cried the mouse ' that is the most suspicious name of all ! i have never seen it in print . all-gone ; what can that mean ? ' and she shook her head , curled herself up , and lay down to sleep . from this time forth no one invited the cat to be godmother , but when the winter had come and there was no longer anything to be found outside , the mouse thought of their provision , and said : ' come , cat , we will go to our pot of fat which we have stored up for ourselves--we shall enjoy that . ' ' yes , ' answered the cat , ' you will enjoy it as much as you would enjoy sticking that dainty tongue of yours out of the window . ' they set out on their way , but when they arrived , the pot of fat certainly was still in its place , but it was empty . ' alas ! ' said the mouse , ' now i see what has happened , now it comes to light ! you are a true friend ! you have devoured all when you were standing godmother . first top off , then half-done , then-- ' ' will you hold your tongue , ' cried the cat , ' one word more , and i will eat you too . ' ' all-gone ' was already on the poor mouse ' s lips ; scarcely had she spoken it before the cat sprang on her , seized her , and swallowed her down . verily , that is the way of the world .