once in summer-time the bear and the wolf were walking in the forest , and the bear heard a bird singing so beautifully that he said : ' brother wolf , what bird is it that sings so well ? ' ' that is the king of birds , ' said the wolf , ' before whom we must bow down . ' in reality the bird was the willow-wren . ' if that ' s the case , ' said the bear , ' i should very much like to see his royal palace ; come , take me thither . ' ' that is not done quite as you seem to think , ' said the wolf ; ' you must wait until the queen comes , ' soon afterwards , the queen arrived with some food in her beak , and the lord king came too , and they began to feed their young ones . the bear would have liked to go at once , but the wolf held him back by the sleeve , and said : ' no , you must wait until the lord and lady queen have gone away again . ' so they took stock of the hole where the nest lay , and trotted away . the bear , however , could not rest until he had seen the royal palace , and when a short time had passed , went to it again . the king and queen had just flown out , so he peeped in and saw five or six young ones lying there . ' is that the royal palace ? ' cried the bear ; ' it is a wretched palace , and you are not king ' s children , you are disreputable children ! ' when the young wrens heard that , they were frightfully angry , and screamed : ' no , that we are not ! our parents are honest people ! bear , you will have to pay for that ! ' the bear and the wolf grew uneasy , and turned back and went into their holes . the young willow-wrens , however , continued to cry and scream , and when their parents again brought food they said : ' we will not so much as touch one fly ' s leg , no , not if we were dying of hunger , until you have settled whether we are respectable children or not ; the bear has been here and has insulted us ! ' then the old king said : ' be easy , he shall be punished , ' and he at once flew with the queen to the bear ' s cave , and called in : ' old growler , why have you insulted my children ? you shall suffer for it--we will punish you by a bloody war . ' thus war was announced to the bear , and all four-footed animals were summoned to take part in it , oxen , asses , cows , deer , and every other animal the earth contained . and the willow-wren summoned everything which flew in the air , not only birds , large and small , but midges , and hornets , bees and flies had to come . when the time came for the war to begin , the willow-wren sent out spies to discover who was the enemy ' s commander-in-chief . the gnat , who was the most crafty , flew into the forest where the enemy was assembled , and hid herself beneath a leaf of the tree where the password was to be announced . there stood the bear , and he called the fox before him and said : ' fox , you are the most cunning of all animals , you shall be general and lead us . ' ' good , ' said the fox , ' but what signal shall we agree upon ? ' no one knew that , so the fox said : ' i have a fine long bushy tail , which almost looks like a plume of red feathers . when i lift my tail up quite high , all is going well , and you must charge ; but if i let it hang down , run away as fast as you can . ' when the gnat had heard that , she flew away again , and revealed everything , down to the minutest detail , to the willow-wren . when day broke , and the battle was to begin , all the four-footed animals came running up with such a noise that the earth trembled . the willow-wren with his army also came flying through the air with such a humming , and whirring , and swarming that every one was uneasy and afraid , and on both sides they advanced against each other . but the willow-wren sent down the hornet , with orders to settle beneath the fox ' s tail , and sting with all his might . when the fox felt the first string , he started so that he lifted one leg , from pain , but he bore it , and still kept his tail high in the air ; at the second sting , he was forced to put it down for a moment ; at the third , he could hold out no longer , screamed , and put his tail between his legs . when the animals saw that , they thought all was lost , and began to flee , each into his hole , and the birds had won the battle . then the king and queen flew home to their children and cried : ' children , rejoice , eat and drink to your heart ' s content , we have won the battle ! ' but the young wrens said : ' we will not eat yet , the bear must come to the nest , and beg for pardon and say that we are honourable children , before we will do that . ' then the willow-wren flew to the bear ' s hole and cried : ' growler , you are to come to the nest to my children , and beg their pardon , or else every rib of your body shall be broken . ' so the bear crept thither in the greatest fear , and begged their pardon . and now at last the young wrens were satisfied , and sat down together and ate and drank , and made merry till quite late into the night .