there was once a forester who went into the forest to hunt , and as he entered it he heard a sound of screaming as if a little child were there . he followed the sound , and at last came to a high tree , and at the top of this a little child was sitting , for the mother had fallen asleep under the tree with the child , and a bird of prey had seen it in her arms , had flown down , snatched it away , and set it on the high tree . the forester climbed up , brought the child down , and thought to himself : ' you will take him home with you , and bring him up with your lina . ' he took it home , therefore , and the two children grew up together . and the one , which he had found on a tree was called fundevogel , because a bird had carried it away . fundevogel and lina loved each other so dearly that when they did not see each other they were sad . now the forester had an old cook , who one evening took two pails and began to fetch water , and did not go once only , but many times , out to the spring . lina saw this and said , ' listen , old sanna , why are you fetching so much water ? ' ' if you will never repeat it to anyone , i will tell you why . ' so lina said , no , she would never repeat it to anyone , and then the cook said : ' early tomorrow morning , when the forester is out hunting , i will heat the water , and when it is boiling in the kettle , i will throw in fundevogel , and will boil him in it . ' early next morning the forester got up and went out hunting , and when he was gone the children were still in bed . then lina said to fundevogel : ' if you will never leave me , i too will never leave you . ' fundevogel said : ' neither now , nor ever will i leave you . ' then said lina : ' then will i tell you . last night , old sanna carried so many buckets of water into the house that i asked her why she was doing that , and she said that if i would promise not to tell anyone , and she said that early tomorrow morning when father was out hunting , she would set the kettle full of water , throw you into it and boil you ; but we will get up quickly , dress ourselves , and go away together . ' the two children therefore got up , dressed themselves quickly , and went away . when the water in the kettle was boiling , the cook went into the bedroom to fetch fundevogel and throw him into it . but when she came in , and went to the beds , both the children were gone . then she was terribly alarmed , and she said to herself : ' what shall i say now when the forester comes home and sees that the children are gone ? they must be followed instantly to get them back again . ' then the cook sent three servants after them , who were to run and overtake the children . the children , however , were sitting outside the forest , and when they saw from afar the three servants running , lina said to fundevogel : ' never leave me , and i will never leave you . ' fundevogel said : ' neither now , nor ever . ' then said lina : ' do you become a rose-tree , and i the rose upon it . ' when the three servants came to the forest , nothing was there but a rose-tree and one rose on it , but the children were nowhere . then said they : ' there is nothing to be done here , ' and they went home and told the cook that they had seen nothing in the forest but a little rose-bush with one rose on it . then the old cook scolded and said : ' you simpletons , you should have cut the rose-bush in two , and have broken off the rose and brought it home with you ; go , and do it at once . ' they had therefore to go out and look for the second time . the children , however , saw them coming from a distance . then lina said : ' fundevogel , never leave me , and i will never leave you . ' fundevogel said : ' neither now ; nor ever . ' said lina : ' then do you become a church , and i ' ll be the chandelier in it . ' so when the three servants came , nothing was there but a church , with a chandelier in it . they said therefore to each other : ' what can we do here , let us go home . ' when they got home , the cook asked if they had not found them ; so they said no , they had found nothing but a church , and there was a chandelier in it . and the cook scolded them and said : ' you fools ! why did you not pull the church to pieces , and bring the chandelier home with you ? ' and now the old cook herself got on her legs , and went with the three servants in pursuit of the children . the children , however , saw from afar that the three servants were coming , and the cook waddling after them . then said lina : ' fundevogel , never leave me , and i will never leave you . ' then said fundevogel : ' neither now , nor ever . ' said lina : ' be a fishpond , and i will be the duck upon it . ' the cook , however , came up to them , and when she saw the pond she lay down by it , and was about to drink it up . but the duck swam quickly to her , seized her head in its beak and drew her into the water , and there the old witch had to drown . then the children went home together , and were heartily delighted , and if they have not died , they are living still .