one summer ' s morning a little tailor was sitting on his table by the window ; he was in good spirits , and sewed with all his might . then came a peasant woman down the street crying : ' good jams , cheap ! good jams , cheap ! ' this rang pleasantly in the tailor ' s ears ; he stretched his delicate head out of the window , and called : ' come up here , dear woman ; here you will get rid of your goods . ' the woman came up the three steps to the tailor with her heavy basket , and he made her unpack all the pots for him . he inspected each one , lifted it up , put his nose to it , and at length said : ' the jam seems to me to be good , so weigh me out four ounces , dear woman , and if it is a quarter of a pound that is of no consequence . ' the woman who had hoped to find a good sale , gave him what he desired , but went away quite angry and grumbling . ' now , this jam shall be blessed by god , ' cried the little tailor , ' and give me health and strength ' ; so he brought the bread out of the cupboard , cut himself a piece right across the loaf and spread the jam over it . ' this won ' t taste bitter , ' said he , ' but i will just finish the jacket before i take a bite . ' he laid the bread near him , sewed on , and in his joy , made bigger and bigger stitches . in the meantime the smell of the sweet jam rose to where the flies were sitting in great numbers , and they were attracted and descended on it in hosts . ' hi ! who invited you ? ' said the little tailor , and drove the unbidden guests away . the flies , however , who understood no german , would not be turned away , but came back again in ever-increasing companies . the little tailor at last lost all patience , and drew a piece of cloth from the hole under his work-table , and saying : ' wait , and i will give it to you , ' struck it mercilessly on them . when he drew it away and counted , there lay before him no fewer than seven , dead and with legs stretched out . ' are you a fellow of that sort ? ' said he , and could not help admiring his own bravery . ' the whole town shall know of this ! ' and the little tailor hastened to cut himself a girdle , stitched it , and embroidered on it in large letters : ' seven at one stroke ! ' ' what , the town ! ' he continued , ' the whole world shall hear of it ! ' and his heart wagged with joy like a lamb ' s tail . the tailor put on the girdle , and resolved to go forth into the world , because he thought his workshop was too small for his valour . before he went away , he sought about in the house to see if there was anything which he could take with him ; however , he found nothing but an old cheese , and that he put in his pocket . in front of the door he observed a bird which had caught itself in the thicket . it had to go into his pocket with the cheese . now he took to the road boldly , and as he was light and nimble , he felt no fatigue . the road led him up a mountain , and when he had reached the highest point of it , there sat a powerful giant looking peacefully about him . the little tailor went bravely up , spoke to him , and said : ' good day , comrade , so you are sitting there overlooking the wide-spread world ! i am just on my way thither , and want to try my luck . have you any inclination to go with me ? ' the giant looked contemptuously at the tailor , and said : ' you ragamuffin ! you miserable creature ! ' ' oh , indeed ? ' answered the little tailor , and unbuttoned his coat , and showed the giant the girdle , ' there may you read what kind of a man i am ! ' the giant read : ' seven at one stroke , ' and thought that they had been men whom the tailor had killed , and began to feel a little respect for the tiny fellow . nevertheless , he wished to try him first , and took a stone in his hand and squeezed it together so that water dropped out of it . ' do that likewise , ' said the giant , ' if you have strength . ' ' is that all ? ' said the tailor , ' that is child ' s play with us ! ' and put his hand into his pocket , brought out the soft cheese , and pressed it until the liquid ran out of it . ' faith , ' said he , ' that was a little better , wasn ' t it ? ' the giant did not know what to say , and could not believe it of the little man . then the giant picked up a stone and threw it so high that the eye could scarcely follow it . ' now , little mite of a man , do that likewise , ' ' well thrown , ' said the tailor , ' but after all the stone came down to earth again ; i will throw you one which shall never come back at all , ' and he put his hand into his pocket , took out the bird , and threw it into the air . the bird , delighted with its liberty , rose , flew away and did not come back . ' how does that shot please you , comrade ? ' asked the tailor . ' you can certainly throw , ' said the giant , ' but now we will see if you are able to carry anything properly . ' he took the little tailor to a mighty oak tree which lay there felled on the ground , and said : ' if you are strong enough , help me to carry the tree out of the forest . ' ' readily , ' answered the little man ; ' take you the trunk on your shoulders , and i will raise up the branches and twigs ; after all , they are the heaviest . ' the giant took the trunk on his shoulder , but the tailor seated himself on a branch , and the giant , who could not look round , had to carry away the whole tree , and the little tailor into the bargain : he behind , was quite merry and happy , and whistled the song : ' three tailors rode forth from the gate , ' as if carrying the tree were child ' s play . the giant , after he had dragged the heavy burden part of the way , could go no further , and cried : ' hark you , i shall have to let the tree fall ! ' the tailor sprang nimbly down , seized the tree with both arms as if he had been carrying it , and said to the giant : ' you are such a great fellow , and yet cannot even carry the tree ! ' they went on together , and as they passed a cherry-tree , the giant laid hold of the top of the tree where the ripest fruit was hanging , bent it down , gave it into the tailor ' s hand , and bade him eat . but the little tailor was much too weak to hold the tree , and when the giant let it go , it sprang back again , and the tailor was tossed into the air with it . when he had fallen down again without injury , the giant said : ' what is this ? have you not strength enough to hold the weak twig ? ' ' there is no lack of strength , ' answered the little tailor . ' do you think that could be anything to a man who has struck down seven at one blow ? i leapt over the tree because the huntsmen are shooting down there in the thicket . jump as i did , if you can do it . ' the giant made the attempt but he could not get over the tree , and remained hanging in the branches , so that in this also the tailor kept the upper hand . the giant said : ' if you are such a valiant fellow , come with me into our cavern and spend the night with us . ' the little tailor was willing , and followed him . when they went into the cave , other giants were sitting there by the fire , and each of them had a roasted sheep in his hand and was eating it . the little tailor looked round and thought : ' it is much more spacious here than in my workshop . ' the giant showed him a bed , and said he was to lie down in it and sleep . the bed , however , was too big for the little tailor ; he did not lie down in it , but crept into a corner . when it was midnight , and the giant thought that the little tailor was lying in a sound sleep , he got up , took a great iron bar , cut through the bed with one blow , and thought he had finished off the grasshopper for good . with the earliest dawn the giants went into the forest , and had quite forgotten the little tailor , when all at once he walked up to them quite merrily and boldly . the giants were terrified , they were afraid that he would strike them all dead , and ran away in a great hurry . the little tailor went onwards , always following his own pointed nose . after he had walked for a long time , he came to the courtyard of a royal palace , and as he felt weary , he lay down on the grass and fell asleep . whilst he lay there , the people came and inspected him on all sides , and read on his girdle : ' seven at one stroke . ' ' ah ! ' said they , ' what does the great warrior want here in the midst of peace ? he must be a mighty lord . ' they went and announced him to the king , and gave it as their opinion that if war should break out , this would be a weighty and useful man who ought on no account to be allowed to depart . the counsel pleased the king , and he sent one of his courtiers to the little tailor to offer him military service when he awoke . the ambassador remained standing by the sleeper , waited until he stretched his limbs and opened his eyes , and then conveyed to him this proposal . ' for this very reason have i come here , ' the tailor replied , ' i am ready to enter the king ' s service . ' he was therefore honourably received , and a special dwelling was assigned him . the soldiers , however , were set against the little tailor , and wished him a thousand miles away . ' what is to be the end of this ? ' they said among themselves . ' if we quarrel with him , and he strikes about him , seven of us will fall at every blow ; not one of us can stand against him . ' they came therefore to a decision , betook themselves in a body to the king , and begged for their dismissal . ' we are not prepared , ' said they , ' to stay with a man who kills seven at one stroke . ' the king was sorry that for the sake of one he should lose all his faithful servants , wished that he had never set eyes on the tailor , and would willingly have been rid of him again . but he did not venture to give him his dismissal , for he dreaded lest he should strike him and all his people dead , and place himself on the royal throne . he thought about it for a long time , and at last found good counsel . he sent to the little tailor and caused him to be informed that as he was a great warrior , he had one request to make to him . in a forest of his country lived two giants , who caused great mischief with their robbing , murdering , ravaging , and burning , and no one could approach them without putting himself in danger of death . if the tailor conquered and killed these two giants , he would give him his only daughter to wife , and half of his kingdom as a dowry , likewise one hundred horsemen should go with him to assist him . ' that would indeed be a fine thing for a man like me ! ' thought the little tailor . ' one is not offered a beautiful princess and half a kingdom every day of one ' s life ! ' ' oh , yes , ' he replied , ' i will soon subdue the giants , and do not require the help of the hundred horsemen to do it ; he who can hit seven with one blow has no need to be afraid of two . ' the little tailor went forth , and the hundred horsemen followed him . when he came to the outskirts of the forest , he said to his followers : ' just stay waiting here , i alone will soon finish off the giants . ' then he bounded into the forest and looked about right and left . after a while he perceived both giants . they lay sleeping under a tree , and snored so that the branches waved up and down . the little tailor , not idle , gathered two pocketsful of stones , and with these climbed up the tree . when he was halfway up , he slipped down by a branch , until he sat just above the sleepers , and then let one stone after another fall on the breast of one of the giants . for a long time the giant felt nothing , but at last he awoke , pushed his comrade , and said : ' why are you knocking me ? ' ' you must be dreaming , ' said the other , ' i am not knocking you . ' they laid themselves down to sleep again , and then the tailor threw a stone down on the second . ' what is the meaning of this ? ' cried the other ' why are you pelting me ? ' ' i am not pelting you , ' answered the first , growling . they disputed about it for a time , but as they were weary they let the matter rest , and their eyes closed once more . the little tailor began his game again , picked out the biggest stone , and threw it with all his might on the breast of the first giant . ' that is too bad ! ' cried he , and sprang up like a madman , and pushed his companion against the tree until it shook . the other paid him back in the same coin , and they got into such a rage that they tore up trees and belaboured each other so long , that at last they both fell down dead on the ground at the same time . then the little tailor leapt down . ' it is a lucky thing , ' said he , ' that they did not tear up the tree on which i was sitting , or i should have had to sprint on to another like a squirrel ; but we tailors are nimble . ' he drew out his sword and gave each of them a couple of thrusts in the breast , and then went out to the horsemen and said : ' the work is done ; i have finished both of them off , but it was hard work ! they tore up trees in their sore need , and defended themselves with them , but all that is to no purpose when a man like myself comes , who can kill seven at one blow . ' ' but are you not wounded ? ' asked the horsemen . ' you need not concern yourself about that , ' answered the tailor , ' they have not bent one hair of mine . ' the horsemen would not believe him , and rode into the forest ; there they found the giants swimming in their blood , and all round about lay the torn-up trees . the little tailor demanded of the king the promised reward ; he , however , repented of his promise , and again bethought himself how he could get rid of the hero . ' before you receive my daughter , and the half of my kingdom , ' said he to him , ' you must perform one more heroic deed . in the forest roams a unicorn which does great harm , and you must catch it first . ' ' i fear one unicorn still less than two giants . seven at one blow , is my kind of affair . ' he took a rope and an axe with him , went forth into the forest , and again bade those who were sent with him to wait outside . he had not long to seek . the unicorn soon came towards him , and rushed directly on the tailor , as if it would gore him with its horn without more ado . ' softly , softly ; it can ' t be done as quickly as that , ' said he , and stood still and waited until the animal was quite close , and then sprang nimbly behind the tree . the unicorn ran against the tree with all its strength , and stuck its horn so fast in the trunk that it had not the strength enough to draw it out again , and thus it was caught . ' now , i have got the bird , ' said the tailor , and came out from behind the tree and put the rope round its neck , and then with his axe he hewed the horn out of the tree , and when all was ready he led the beast away and took it to the king . the king still would not give him the promised reward , and made a third demand . before the wedding the tailor was to catch him a wild boar that made great havoc in the forest , and the huntsmen should give him their help . ' willingly , ' said the tailor , ' that is child ' s play ! ' he did not take the huntsmen with him into the forest , and they were well pleased that he did not , for the wild boar had several times received them in such a manner that they had no inclination to lie in wait for him . when the boar perceived the tailor , it ran on him with foaming mouth and whetted tusks , and was about to throw him to the ground , but the hero fled and sprang into a chapel which was near and up to the window at once , and in one bound out again . the boar ran after him , but the tailor ran round outside and shut the door behind it , and then the raging beast , which was much too heavy and awkward to leap out of the window , was caught . the little tailor called the huntsmen thither that they might see the prisoner with their own eyes . the hero , however , went to the king , who was now , whether he liked it or not , obliged to keep his promise , and gave his daughter and the half of his kingdom . had he known that it was no warlike hero , but a little tailor who was standing before him , it would have gone to his heart still more than it did . the wedding was held with great magnificence and small joy , and out of a tailor a king was made . after some time the young queen heard her husband say in his dreams at night : ' boy , make me the doublet , and patch the pantaloons , or else i will rap the yard-measure over your ears . ' then she discovered in what state of life the young lord had been born , and next morning complained of her wrongs to her father , and begged him to help her to get rid of her husband , who was nothing else but a tailor . the king comforted her and said : ' leave your bedroom door open this night , and my servants shall stand outside , and when he has fallen asleep shall go in , bind him , and take him on board a ship which shall carry him into the wide world . ' the woman was satisfied with this ; but the king ' s armour-bearer , who had heard all , was friendly with the young lord , and informed him of the whole plot . ' i ' ll put a screw into that business , ' said the little tailor . at night he went to bed with his wife at the usual time , and when she thought that he had fallen asleep , she got up , opened the door , and then lay down again . the little tailor , who was only pretending to be asleep , began to cry out in a clear voice : ' boy , make me the doublet and patch me the pantaloons , or i will rap the yard-measure over your ears . i smote seven at one blow . i killed two giants , i brought away one unicorn , and caught a wild boar , and am i to fear those who are standing outside the room . ' when these men heard the tailor speaking thus , they were overcome by a great dread , and ran as if the wild huntsman were behind them , and none of them would venture anything further against him . so the little tailor was and remained a king to the end of his life .