in a village dwelt a poor old woman , who had gathered together a dish of beans and wanted to cook them . so she made a fire on her hearth , and that it might burn the quicker , she lighted it with a handful of straw . when she was emptying the beans into the pan , one dropped without her observing it , and lay on the ground beside a straw , and soon afterwards a burning coal from the fire leapt down to the two . then the straw began and said : ' dear friends , from whence do you come here ? ' the coal replied : ' i fortunately sprang out of the fire , and if i had not escaped by sheer force , my death would have been certain , --i should have been burnt to ashes . ' the bean said : ' i too have escaped with a whole skin , but if the old woman had got me into the pan , i should have been made into broth without any mercy , like my comrades . ' ' and would a better fate have fallen to my lot ? ' said the straw . ' the old woman has destroyed all my brethren in fire and smoke ; she seized sixty of them at once , and took their lives . i luckily slipped through her fingers . ' ' but what are we to do now ? ' said the coal . ' i think , ' answered the bean , ' that as we have so fortunately escaped death , we should keep together like good companions , and lest a new mischance should overtake us here , we should go away together , and repair to a foreign country . ' the proposition pleased the two others , and they set out on their way together . soon , however , they came to a little brook , and as there was no bridge or foot-plank , they did not know how they were to get over it . the straw hit on a good idea , and said : ' i will lay myself straight across , and then you can walk over on me as on a bridge . ' the straw therefore stretched itself from one bank to the other , and the coal , who was of an impetuous disposition , tripped quite boldly on to the newly-built bridge . but when she had reached the middle , and heard the water rushing beneath her , she was after all , afraid , and stood still , and ventured no farther . the straw , however , began to burn , broke in two pieces , and fell into the stream . the coal slipped after her , hissed when she got into the water , and breathed her last . the bean , who had prudently stayed behind on the shore , could not but laugh at the event , was unable to stop , and laughed so heartily that she burst . it would have been all over with her , likewise , if , by good fortune , a tailor who was travelling in search of work , had not sat down to rest by the brook . as he had a compassionate heart he pulled out his needle and thread , and sewed her together . the bean thanked him most prettily , but as the tailor used black thread , all beans since then have a black seam .