there was a man who had three sons , the youngest of whom was called dummling , [ * ] and was despised , mocked , and sneered at on every occasion . [ * ] simpleton it happened that the eldest wanted to go into the forest to hew wood , and before he went his mother gave him a beautiful sweet cake and a bottle of wine in order that he might not suffer from hunger or thirst . when he entered the forest he met a little grey-haired old man who bade him good day , and said : ' do give me a piece of cake out of your pocket , and let me have a draught of your wine ; i am so hungry and thirsty . ' but the clever son answered : ' if i give you my cake and wine , i shall have none for myself ; be off with you , ' and he left the little man standing and went on . but when he began to hew down a tree , it was not long before he made a false stroke , and the axe cut him in the arm , so that he had to go home and have it bound up . and this was the little grey man ' s doing . after this the second son went into the forest , and his mother gave him , like the eldest , a cake and a bottle of wine . the little old grey man met him likewise , and asked him for a piece of cake and a drink of wine . but the second son , too , said sensibly enough : ' what i give you will be taken away from myself ; be off ! ' and he left the little man standing and went on . his punishment , however , was not delayed ; when he had made a few blows at the tree he struck himself in the leg , so that he had to be carried home . then dummling said : ' father , do let me go and cut wood . ' the father answered : ' your brothers have hurt themselves with it , leave it alone , you do not understand anything about it . ' but dummling begged so long that at last he said : ' just go then , you will get wiser by hurting yourself . ' his mother gave him a cake made with water and baked in the cinders , and with it a bottle of sour beer . when he came to the forest the little old grey man met him likewise , and greeting him , said : ' give me a piece of your cake and a drink out of your bottle ; i am so hungry and thirsty . ' dummling answered : ' i have only cinder-cake and sour beer ; if that pleases you , we will sit down and eat . ' so they sat down , and when dummling pulled out his cinder-cake , it was a fine sweet cake , and the sour beer had become good wine . so they ate and drank , and after that the little man said : ' since you have a good heart , and are willing to divide what you have , i will give you good luck . there stands an old tree , cut it down , and you will find something at the roots . ' then the little man took leave of him . dummling went and cut down the tree , and when it fell there was a goose sitting in the roots with feathers of pure gold . he lifted her up , and taking her with him , went to an inn where he thought he would stay the night . now the host had three daughters , who saw the goose and were curious to know what such a wonderful bird might be , and would have liked to have one of its golden feathers . the eldest thought : ' i shall soon find an opportunity of pulling out a feather , ' and as soon as dummling had gone out she seized the goose by the wing , but her finger and hand remained sticking fast to it . the second came soon afterwards , thinking only of how she might get a feather for herself , but she had scarcely touched her sister than she was held fast . at last the third also came with the like intent , and the others screamed out : ' keep away ; for goodness ' sake keep away ! ' but she did not understand why she was to keep away . ' the others are there , ' she thought , ' i may as well be there too , ' and ran to them ; but as soon as she had touched her sister , she remained sticking fast to her . so they had to spend the night with the goose . the next morning dummling took the goose under his arm and set out , without troubling himself about the three girls who were hanging on to it . they were obliged to run after him continually , now left , now right , wherever his legs took him . in the middle of the fields the parson met them , and when he saw the procession he said : ' for shame , you good-for-nothing girls , why are you running across the fields after this young man ? is that seemly ? ' at the same time he seized the youngest by the hand in order to pull her away , but as soon as he touched her he likewise stuck fast , and was himself obliged to run behind . before long the sexton came by and saw his master , the parson , running behind three girls . he was astonished at this and called out : ' hi ! your reverence , whither away so quickly ? do not forget that we have a christening today ! ' and running after him he took him by the sleeve , but was also held fast to it . whilst the five were trotting thus one behind the other , two labourers came with their hoes from the fields ; the parson called out to them and begged that they would set him and the sexton free . but they had scarcely touched the sexton when they were held fast , and now there were seven of them running behind dummling and the goose . soon afterwards he came to a city , where a king ruled who had a daughter who was so serious that no one could make her laugh . so he had put forth a decree that whosoever should be able to make her laugh should marry her . when dummling heard this , he went with his goose and all her train before the king ' s daughter , and as soon as she saw the seven people running on and on , one behind the other , she began to laugh quite loudly , and as if she would never stop . thereupon dummling asked to have her for his wife ; but the king did not like the son-in-law , and made all manner of excuses and said he must first produce a man who could drink a cellarful of wine . dummling thought of the little grey man , who could certainly help him ; so he went into the forest , and in the same place where he had felled the tree , he saw a man sitting , who had a very sorrowful face . dummling asked him what he was taking to heart so sorely , and he answered : ' i have such a great thirst and cannot quench it ; cold water i cannot stand , a barrel of wine i have just emptied , but that to me is like a drop on a hot stone ! ' ' there , i can help you , ' said dummling , ' just come with me and you shall be satisfied . ' he led him into the king ' s cellar , and the man bent over the huge barrels , and drank and drank till his loins hurt , and before the day was out he had emptied all the barrels . then dummling asked once more for his bride , but the king was vexed that such an ugly fellow , whom everyone called dummling , should take away his daughter , and he made a new condition ; he must first find a man who could eat a whole mountain of bread . dummling did not think long , but went straight into the forest , where in the same place there sat a man who was tying up his body with a strap , and making an awful face , and saying : ' i have eaten a whole ovenful of rolls , but what good is that when one has such a hunger as i ? my stomach remains empty , and i must tie myself up if i am not to die of hunger . ' at this dummling was glad , and said : ' get up and come with me ; you shall eat yourself full . ' he led him to the king ' s palace where all the flour in the whole kingdom was collected , and from it he caused a huge mountain of bread to be baked . the man from the forest stood before it , began to eat , and by the end of one day the whole mountain had vanished . then dummling for the third time asked for his bride ; but the king again sought a way out , and ordered a ship which could sail on land and on water . ' as soon as you come sailing back in it , ' said he , ' you shall have my daughter for wife . ' dummling went straight into the forest , and there sat the little grey man to whom he had given his cake . when he heard what dummling wanted , he said : ' since you have given me to eat and to drink , i will give you the ship ; and i do all this because you once were kind to me . ' then he gave him the ship which could sail on land and water , and when the king saw that , he could no longer prevent him from having his daughter . the wedding was celebrated , and after the king ' s death , dummling inherited his kingdom and lived for a long time contentedly with his wife .