long , long ago , some two thousand years or so , there lived a rich man with a good and beautiful wife . they loved each other dearly , but sorrowed much that they had no children . so greatly did they desire to have one , that the wife prayed for it day and night , but still they remained childless . in front of the house there was a court , in which grew a juniper-tree . one winter ' s day the wife stood under the tree to peel some apples , and as she was peeling them , she cut her finger , and the blood fell on the snow . ' ah , ' sighed the woman heavily , ' if i had but a child , as red as blood and as white as snow , ' and as she spoke the words , her heart grew light within her , and it seemed to her that her wish was granted , and she returned to the house feeling glad and comforted . a month passed , and the snow had all disappeared ; then another month went by , and all the earth was green . so the months followed one another , and first the trees budded in the woods , and soon the green branches grew thickly intertwined , and then the blossoms began to fall . once again the wife stood under the juniper-tree , and it was so full of sweet scent that her heart leaped for joy , and she was so overcome with her happiness , that she fell on her knees . presently the fruit became round and firm , and she was glad and at peace ; but when they were fully ripe she picked the berries and ate eagerly of them , and then she grew sad and ill . a little while later she called her husband , and said to him , weeping . ' if i die , bury me under the juniper-tree . ' then she felt comforted and happy again , and before another month had passed she had a little child , and when she saw that it was as white as snow and as red as blood , her joy was so great that she died . her husband buried her under the juniper-tree , and wept bitterly for her . by degrees , however , his sorrow grew less , and although at times he still grieved over his loss , he was able to go about as usual , and later on he married again . he now had a little daughter born to him ; the child of his first wife was a boy , who was as red as blood and as white as snow . the mother loved her daughter very much , and when she looked at her and then looked at the boy , it pierced her heart to think that he would always stand in the way of her own child , and she was continually thinking how she could get the whole of the property for her . this evil thought took possession of her more and more , and made her behave very unkindly to the boy . she drove him from place to place with cuffings and buffetings , so that the poor child went about in fear , and had no peace from the time he left school to the time he went back . one day the little daughter came running to her mother in the store-room , and said , ' mother , give me an apple . ' ' yes , my child , ' said the wife , and she gave her a beautiful apple out of the chest ; the chest had a very heavy lid and a large iron lock . ' mother , ' said the little daughter again , ' may not brother have one too ? ' the mother was angry at this , but she answered , ' yes , when he comes out of school . ' just then she looked out of the window and saw him coming , and it seemed as if an evil spirit entered into her , for she snatched the apple out of her little daughter ' s hand , and said , ' you shall not have one before your brother . ' she threw the apple into the chest and shut it to . the little boy now came in , and the evil spirit in the wife made her say kindly to him , ' my son , will you have an apple ? ' but she gave him a wicked look . ' mother , ' said the boy , ' how dreadful you look ! yes , give me an apple . ' the thought came to her that she would kill him . ' come with me , ' she said , and she lifted up the lid of the chest ; ' take one out for yourself . ' and as he bent over to do so , the evil spirit urged her , and crash ! down went the lid , and off went the little boy ' s head . then she was overwhelmed with fear at the thought of what she had done . ' if only i can prevent anyone knowing that i did it , ' she thought . so she went upstairs to her room , and took a white handkerchief out of her top drawer ; then she set the boy ' s head again on his shoulders , and bound it with the handkerchief so that nothing could be seen , and placed him on a chair by the door with an apple in his hand . soon after this , little marleen came up to her mother who was stirring a pot of boiling water over the fire , and said , ' mother , brother is sitting by the door with an apple in his hand , and he looks so pale ; and when i asked him to give me the apple , he did not answer , and that frightened me . ' ' go to him again , ' said her mother , ' and if he does not answer , give him a box on the ear . ' so little marleen went , and said , ' brother , give me that apple , ' but he did not say a word ; then she gave him a box on the ear , and his head rolled off . she was so terrified at this , that she ran crying and screaming to her mother . ' oh ! ' she said , ' i have knocked off brother ' s head , ' and then she wept and wept , and nothing would stop her . ' what have you done ! ' said her mother , ' but no one must know about it , so you must keep silence ; what is done can ' t be undone ; we will make him into puddings . ' and she took the little boy and cut him up , made him into puddings , and put him in the pot . but marleen stood looking on , and wept and wept , and her tears fell into the pot , so that there was no need of salt . presently the father came home and sat down to his dinner ; he asked , ' where is my son ? ' the mother said nothing , but gave him a large dish of black pudding , and marleen still wept without ceasing . the father again asked , ' where is my son ? ' ' oh , ' answered the wife , ' he is gone into the country to his mother ' s great uncle ; he is going to stay there some time . ' ' what has he gone there for , and he never even said goodbye to me ! ' ' well , he likes being there , and he told me he should be away quite six weeks ; he is well looked after there . ' ' i feel very unhappy about it , ' said the husband , ' in case it should not be all right , and he ought to have said goodbye to me . ' with this he went on with his dinner , and said , ' little marleen , why do you weep ? brother will soon be back . ' then he asked his wife for more pudding , and as he ate , he threw the bones under the table . little marleen went upstairs and took her best silk handkerchief out of her bottom drawer , and in it she wrapped all the bones from under the table and carried them outside , and all the time she did nothing but weep . then she laid them in the green grass under the juniper-tree , and she had no sooner done so , then all her sadness seemed to leave her , and she wept no more . and now the juniper-tree began to move , and the branches waved backwards and forwards , first away from one another , and then together again , as it might be someone clapping their hands for joy . after this a mist came round the tree , and in the midst of it there was a burning as of fire , and out of the fire there flew a beautiful bird , that rose high into the air , singing magnificently , and when it could no more be seen , the juniper-tree stood there as before , and the silk handkerchief and the bones were gone . little marleen now felt as lighthearted and happy as if her brother were still alive , and she went back to the house and sat down cheerfully to the table and ate . the bird flew away and alighted on the house of a goldsmith and began to sing : ' my mother killed her little son ; my father grieved when i was gone ; my sister loved me best of all ; she laid her kerchief over me , and took my bones that they might lie underneath the juniper-tree kywitt , kywitt , what a beautiful bird am i ! ' the goldsmith was in his workshop making a gold chain , when he heard the song of the bird on his roof . he thought it so beautiful that he got up and ran out , and as he crossed the threshold he lost one of his slippers . but he ran on into the middle of the street , with a slipper on one foot and a sock on the other ; he still had on his apron , and still held the gold chain and the pincers in his hands , and so he stood gazing up at the bird , while the sun came shining brightly down on the street . ' bird , ' he said , ' how beautifully you sing ! sing me that song again . ' ' nay , ' said the bird , ' i do not sing twice for nothing . give that gold chain , and i will sing it you again . ' ' here is the chain , take it , ' said the goldsmith . ' only sing me that again . ' the bird flew down and took the gold chain in his right claw , and then he alighted again in front of the goldsmith and sang : ' my mother killed her little son ; my father grieved when i was gone ; my sister loved me best of all ; she laid her kerchief over me , and took my bones that they might lie underneath the juniper-tree kywitt , kywitt , what a beautiful bird am i ! ' then he flew away , and settled on the roof of a shoemaker ' s house and sang : ' my mother killed her little son ; my father grieved when i was gone ; my sister loved me best of all ; she laid her kerchief over me , and took my bones that they might lie underneath the juniper-tree kywitt , kywitt , what a beautiful bird am i ! ' the shoemaker heard him , and he jumped up and ran out in his shirt-sleeves , and stood looking up at the bird on the roof with his hand over his eyes to keep himself from being blinded by the sun . ' bird , ' he said , ' how beautifully you sing ! ' then he called through the door to his wife : ' wife , come out ; here is a bird , come and look at it and hear how beautifully it sings . ' then he called his daughter and the children , then the apprentices , girls and boys , and they all ran up the street to look at the bird , and saw how splendid it was with its red and green feathers , and its neck like burnished gold , and eyes like two bright stars in its head . ' bird , ' said the shoemaker , ' sing me that song again . ' ' nay , ' answered the bird , ' i do not sing twice for nothing ; you must give me something . ' ' wife , ' said the man , ' go into the garret ; on the upper shelf you will see a pair of red shoes ; bring them to me . ' the wife went in and fetched the shoes . ' there , bird , ' said the shoemaker , ' now sing me that song again . ' the bird flew down and took the red shoes in his left claw , and then he went back to the roof and sang : ' my mother killed her little son ; my father grieved when i was gone ; my sister loved me best of all ; she laid her kerchief over me , and took my bones that they might lie underneath the juniper-tree kywitt , kywitt , what a beautiful bird am i ! ' when he had finished , he flew away . he had the chain in his right claw and the shoes in his left , and he flew right away to a mill , and the mill went ' click clack , click clack , click clack . ' inside the mill were twenty of the miller ' s men hewing a stone , and as they went ' hick hack , hick hack , hick hack , ' the mill went ' click clack , click clack , click clack . ' the bird settled on a lime-tree in front of the mill and sang : ' my mother killed her little son ; then one of the men left off , my father grieved when i was gone ; two more men left off and listened , my sister loved me best of all ; then four more left off , she laid her kerchief over me , and took my bones that they might lie now there were only eight at work , underneath and now only five , the juniper-tree . and now only one , kywitt , kywitt , what a beautiful bird am i ! ' then he looked up and the last one had left off work . ' bird , ' he said , ' what a beautiful song that is you sing ! let me hear it too ; sing it again . ' ' nay , ' answered the bird , ' i do not sing twice for nothing ; give me that millstone , and i will sing it again . ' ' if it belonged to me alone , ' said the man , ' you should have it . ' ' yes , yes , ' said the others : ' if he will sing again , he can have it . ' the bird came down , and all the twenty millers set to and lifted up the stone with a beam ; then the bird put his head through the hole and took the stone round his neck like a collar , and flew back with it to the tree and sang-- ' my mother killed her little son ; my father grieved when i was gone ; my sister loved me best of all ; she laid her kerchief over me , and took my bones that they might lie underneath the juniper-tree kywitt , kywitt , what a beautiful bird am i ! ' and when he had finished his song , he spread his wings , and with the chain in his right claw , the shoes in his left , and the millstone round his neck , he flew right away to his father ' s house . the father , the mother , and little marleen were having their dinner . ' how lighthearted i feel , ' said the father , ' so pleased and cheerful . ' ' and i , ' said the mother , ' i feel so uneasy , as if a heavy thunderstorm were coming . ' but little marleen sat and wept and wept . then the bird came flying towards the house and settled on the roof . ' i do feel so happy , ' said the father , ' and how beautifully the sun shines ; i feel just as if i were going to see an old friend again . ' ' ah ! ' said the wife , ' and i am so full of distress and uneasiness that my teeth chatter , and i feel as if there were a fire in my veins , ' and she tore open her dress ; and all the while little marleen sat in the corner and wept , and the plate on her knees was wet with her tears . the bird now flew to the juniper-tree and began singing : ' my mother killed her little son ; the mother shut her eyes and her ears , that she might see and hear nothing , but there was a roaring sound in her ears like that of a violent storm , and in her eyes a burning and flashing like lightning : my father grieved when i was gone ; ' look , mother , ' said the man , ' at the beautiful bird that is singing so magnificently ; and how warm and bright the sun is , and what a delicious scent of spice in the air ! ' my sister loved me best of all ; then little marleen laid her head down on her knees and sobbed . ' i must go outside and see the bird nearer , ' said the man . ' ah , do not go ! ' cried the wife . ' i feel as if the whole house were in flames ! ' but the man went out and looked at the bird . she laid her kerchief over me , and took my bones that they might lie underneath the juniper-tree kywitt , kywitt , what a beautiful bird am i ! ' with that the bird let fall the gold chain , and it fell just round the man ' s neck , so that it fitted him exactly . he went inside , and said , ' see , what a splendid bird that is ; he has given me this beautiful gold chain , and looks so beautiful himself . ' but the wife was in such fear and trouble , that she fell on the floor , and her cap fell from her head . then the bird began again : ' my mother killed her little son ; ' ah me ! ' cried the wife , ' if i were but a thousand feet beneath the earth , that i might not hear that song . ' my father grieved when i was gone ; then the woman fell down again as if dead . my sister loved me best of all ; ' well , ' said little marleen , ' i will go out too and see if the bird will give me anything . ' so she went out . she laid her kerchief over me , and took my bones that they might lie and he threw down the shoes to her , underneath the juniper-tree kywitt , kywitt , what a beautiful bird am i ! ' and she now felt quite happy and lighthearted ; she put on the shoes and danced and jumped about in them . ' i was so miserable , ' she said , ' when i came out , but that has all passed away ; that is indeed a splendid bird , and he has given me a pair of red shoes . ' the wife sprang up , with her hair standing out from her head like flames of fire . ' then i will go out too , ' she said , ' and see if it will lighten my misery , for i feel as if the world were coming to an end . ' but as she crossed the threshold , crash ! the bird threw the millstone down on her head , and she was crushed to death . the father and little marleen heard the sound and ran out , but they only saw mist and flame and fire rising from the spot , and when these had passed , there stood the little brother , and he took the father and little marleen by the hand ; then they all three rejoiced , and went inside together and sat down to their dinners and ate .