a farmer had a faithful and diligent servant , who had worked hard for him three years , without having been paid any wages . at last it came into the man ' s head that he would not go on thus without pay any longer ; so he went to his master , and said , ' i have worked hard for you a long time , i will trust to you to give me what i deserve to have for my trouble . ' the farmer was a sad miser , and knew that his man was very simple-hearted ; so he took out threepence , and gave him for every year ' s service a penny . the poor fellow thought it was a great deal of money to have , and said to himself , ' why should i work hard , and live here on bad fare any longer ? i can now travel into the wide world , and make myself merry . ' with that he put his money into his purse , and set out , roaming over hill and valley . as he jogged along over the fields , singing and dancing , a little dwarf met him , and asked him what made him so merry . ' why , what should make me down-hearted ? ' said he ; ' i am sound in health and rich in purse , what should i care for ? i have saved up my three years ' earnings and have it all safe in my pocket . ' ' how much may it come to ? ' said the little man . ' full threepence , ' replied the countryman . ' i wish you would give them to me , ' said the other ; ' i am very poor . ' then the man pitied him , and gave him all he had ; and the little dwarf said in return , ' as you have such a kind honest heart , i will grant you three wishes--one for every penny ; so choose whatever you like . ' then the countryman rejoiced at his good luck , and said , ' i like many things better than money : first , i will have a bow that will bring down everything i shoot at ; secondly , a fiddle that will set everyone dancing that hears me play upon it ; and thirdly , i should like that everyone should grant what i ask . ' the dwarf said he should have his three wishes ; so he gave him the bow and fiddle , and went his way . our honest friend journeyed on his way too ; and if he was merry before , he was now ten times more so . he had not gone far before he met an old miser : close by them stood a tree , and on the topmost twig sat a thrush singing away most joyfully . ' oh , what a pretty bird ! ' said the miser ; ' i would give a great deal of money to have such a one . ' ' if that ' s all , ' said the countryman , ' i will soon bring it down . ' then he took up his bow , and down fell the thrush into the bushes at the foot of the tree . the miser crept into the bush to find it ; but directly he had got into the middle , his companion took up his fiddle and played away , and the miser began to dance and spring about , capering higher and higher in the air . the thorns soon began to tear his clothes till they all hung in rags about him , and he himself was all scratched and wounded , so that the blood ran down . ' oh , for heaven ' s sake ! ' cried the miser , ' master ! master ! pray let the fiddle alone . what have i done to deserve this ? ' ' thou hast shaved many a poor soul close enough , ' said the other ; ' thou art only meeting thy reward ' : so he played up another tune . then the miser began to beg and promise , and offered money for his liberty ; but he did not come up to the musician ' s price for some time , and he danced him along brisker and brisker , and the miser bid higher and higher , till at last he offered a round hundred of florins that he had in his purse , and had just gained by cheating some poor fellow . when the countryman saw so much money , he said , ' i will agree to your proposal . ' so he took the purse , put up his fiddle , and travelled on very pleased with his bargain . meanwhile the miser crept out of the bush half-naked and in a piteous plight , and began to ponder how he should take his revenge , and serve his late companion some trick . at last he went to the judge , and complained that a rascal had robbed him of his money , and beaten him into the bargain ; and that the fellow who did it carried a bow at his back and a fiddle hung round his neck . then the judge sent out his officers to bring up the accused wherever they should find him ; and he was soon caught and brought up to be tried . the miser began to tell his tale , and said he had been robbed of his money . ' no , you gave it me for playing a tune to you . ' said the countryman ; but the judge told him that was not likely , and cut the matter short by ordering him off to the gallows . so away he was taken ; but as he stood on the steps he said , ' my lord judge , grant me one last request . ' ' anything but thy life , ' replied the other . ' no , ' said he , ' i do not ask my life ; only to let me play upon my fiddle for the last time . ' the miser cried out , ' oh , no ! no ! for heaven ' s sake don ' t listen to him ! don ' t listen to him ! ' but the judge said , ' it is only this once , he will soon have done . ' the fact was , he could not refuse the request , on account of the dwarf ' s third gift . then the miser said , ' bind me fast , bind me fast , for pity ' s sake . ' but the countryman seized his fiddle , and struck up a tune , and at the first note judge , clerks , and jailer were in motion ; all began capering , and no one could hold the miser . at the second note the hangman let his prisoner go , and danced also , and by the time he had played the first bar of the tune , all were dancing together--judge , court , and miser , and all the people who had followed to look on . at first the thing was merry and pleasant enough ; but when it had gone on a while , and there seemed to be no end of playing or dancing , they began to cry out , and beg him to leave off ; but he stopped not a whit the more for their entreaties , till the judge not only gave him his life , but promised to return him the hundred florins . then he called to the miser , and said , ' tell us now , you vagabond , where you got that gold , or i shall play on for your amusement only , ' ' i stole it , ' said the miser in the presence of all the people ; ' i acknowledge that i stole it , and that you earned it fairly . ' then the countryman stopped his fiddle , and left the miser to take his place at the gallows .