there was once a king , whose queen had hair of the purest gold , and was so beautiful that her match was not to be met with on the whole face of the earth . but this beautiful queen fell ill , and when she felt that her end drew near she called the king to her and said , ' promise me that you will never marry again , unless you meet with a wife who is as beautiful as i am , and who has golden hair like mine . ' then when the king in his grief promised all she asked , she shut her eyes and died . but the king was not to be comforted , and for a long time never thought of taking another wife . at last , however , his wise men said , ' this will not do ; the king must marry again , that we may have a queen . ' so messengers were sent far and wide , to seek for a bride as beautiful as the late queen . but there was no princess in the world so beautiful ; and if there had been , still there was not one to be found who had golden hair . so the messengers came home , and had had all their trouble for nothing . now the king had a daughter , who was just as beautiful as her mother , and had the same golden hair . and when she was grown up , the king looked at her and saw that she was just like this late queen : then he said to his courtiers , ' may i not marry my daughter ? she is the very image of my dead wife : unless i have her , i shall not find any bride upon the whole earth , and you say there must be a queen . ' when the courtiers heard this they were shocked , and said , ' heaven forbid that a father should marry his daughter ! out of so great a sin no good can come . ' and his daughter was also shocked , but hoped the king would soon give up such thoughts ; so she said to him , ' before i marry anyone i must have three dresses : one must be of gold , like the sun ; another must be of shining silver , like the moon ; and a third must be dazzling as the stars : besides this , i want a mantle of a thousand different kinds of fur put together , to which every beast in the kingdom must give a part of his skin . ' and thus she thought he would think of the matter no more . but the king made the most skilful workmen in his kingdom weave the three dresses : one golden , like the sun ; another silvery , like the moon ; and a third sparkling , like the stars : and his hunters were told to hunt out all the beasts in his kingdom , and to take the finest fur out of their skins : and thus a mantle of a thousand furs was made . when all were ready , the king sent them to her ; but she got up in the night when all were asleep , and took three of her trinkets , a golden ring , a golden necklace , and a golden brooch , and packed the three dresses--of the sun , the moon , and the stars--up in a nutshell , and wrapped herself up in the mantle made of all sorts of fur , and besmeared her face and hands with soot . then she threw herself upon heaven for help in her need , and went away , and journeyed on the whole night , till at last she came to a large wood . as she was very tired , she sat herself down in the hollow of a tree and soon fell asleep : and there she slept on till it was midday . now as the king to whom the wood belonged was hunting in it , his dogs came to the tree , and began to snuff about , and run round and round , and bark . ' look sharp ! ' said the king to the huntsmen , ' and see what sort of game lies there . ' and the huntsmen went up to the tree , and when they came back again said , ' in the hollow tree there lies a most wonderful beast , such as we never saw before ; its skin seems to be of a thousand kinds of fur , but there it lies fast asleep . ' ' see , ' said the king , ' if you can catch it alive , and we will take it with us . ' so the huntsmen took it up , and the maiden awoke and was greatly frightened , and said , ' i am a poor child that has neither father nor mother left ; have pity on me and take me with you . ' then they said , ' yes , miss cat-skin , you will do for the kitchen ; you can sweep up the ashes , and do things of that sort . ' so they put her into the coach , and took her home to the king ' s palace . then they showed her a little corner under the staircase , where no light of day ever peeped in , and said , ' cat-skin , you may lie and sleep there . ' and she was sent into the kitchen , and made to fetch wood and water , to blow the fire , pluck the poultry , pick the herbs , sift the ashes , and do all the dirty work . thus cat-skin lived for a long time very sorrowfully . ' ah ! pretty princess ! ' thought she , ' what will now become of thee ? ' but it happened one day that a feast was to be held in the king ' s castle , so she said to the cook , ' may i go up a little while and see what is going on ? i will take care and stand behind the door . ' and the cook said , ' yes , you may go , but be back again in half an hour ' s time , to rake out the ashes . ' then she took her little lamp , and went into her cabin , and took off the fur skin , and washed the soot from off her face and hands , so that her beauty shone forth like the sun from behind the clouds . she next opened her nutshell , and brought out of it the dress that shone like the sun , and so went to the feast . everyone made way for her , for nobody knew her , and they thought she could be no less than a king ' s daughter . but the king came up to her , and held out his hand and danced with her ; and he thought in his heart , ' i never saw any one half so beautiful . ' when the dance was at an end she curtsied ; and when the king looked round for her , she was gone , no one knew wither . the guards that stood at the castle gate were called in : but they had seen no one . the truth was , that she had run into her little cabin , pulled off her dress , blackened her face and hands , put on the fur-skin cloak , and was cat-skin again . when she went into the kitchen to her work , and began to rake the ashes , the cook said , ' let that alone till the morning , and heat the king ' s soup ; i should like to run up now and give a peep : but take care you don ' t let a hair fall into it , or you will run a chance of never eating again . ' as soon as the cook went away , cat-skin heated the king ' s soup , and toasted a slice of bread first , as nicely as ever she could ; and when it was ready , she went and looked in the cabin for her little golden ring , and put it into the dish in which the soup was . when the dance was over , the king ordered his soup to be brought in ; and it pleased him so well , that he thought he had never tasted any so good before . at the bottom he saw a gold ring lying ; and as he could not make out how it had got there , he ordered the cook to be sent for . the cook was frightened when he heard the order , and said to cat-skin , ' you must have let a hair fall into the soup ; if it be so , you will have a good beating . ' then he went before the king , and he asked him who had cooked the soup . ' i did , ' answered the cook . but the king said , ' that is not true ; it was better done than you could do it . ' then he answered , ' to tell the truth i did not cook it , but cat-skin did . ' ' then let cat-skin come up , ' said the king : and when she came he said to her , ' who are you ? ' ' i am a poor child , ' said she , ' that has lost both father and mother . ' ' how came you in my palace ? ' asked he . ' i am good for nothing , ' said she , ' but to be scullion-girl , and to have boots and shoes thrown at my head . ' ' but how did you get the ring that was in the soup ? ' asked the king . then she would not own that she knew anything about the ring ; so the king sent her away again about her business . after a time there was another feast , and cat-skin asked the cook to let her go up and see it as before . ' yes , ' said he , ' but come again in half an hour , and cook the king the soup that he likes so much . ' then she ran to her little cabin , washed herself quickly , and took her dress out which was silvery as the moon , and put it on ; and when she went in , looking like a king ' s daughter , the king went up to her , and rejoiced at seeing her again , and when the dance began he danced with her . after the dance was at an end she managed to slip out , so slyly that the king did not see where she was gone ; but she sprang into her little cabin , and made herself into cat-skin again , and went into the kitchen to cook the soup . whilst the cook was above stairs , she got the golden necklace and dropped it into the soup ; then it was brought to the king , who ate it , and it pleased him as well as before ; so he sent for the cook , who was again forced to tell him that cat-skin had cooked it . cat-skin was brought again before the king , but she still told him that she was only fit to have boots and shoes thrown at her head . but when the king had ordered a feast to be got ready for the third time , it happened just the same as before . ' you must be a witch , cat-skin , ' said the cook ; ' for you always put something into your soup , so that it pleases the king better than mine . ' however , he let her go up as before . then she put on her dress which sparkled like the stars , and went into the ball-room in it ; and the king danced with her again , and thought she had never looked so beautiful as she did then . so whilst he was dancing with her , he put a gold ring on her finger without her seeing it , and ordered that the dance should be kept up a long time . when it was at an end , he would have held her fast by the hand , but she slipped away , and sprang so quickly through the crowd that he lost sight of her : and she ran as fast as she could into her little cabin under the stairs . but this time she kept away too long , and stayed beyond the half-hour ; so she had not time to take off her fine dress , and threw her fur mantle over it , and in her haste did not blacken herself all over with soot , but left one of her fingers white . then she ran into the kitchen , and cooked the king ' s soup ; and as soon as the cook was gone , she put the golden brooch into the dish . when the king got to the bottom , he ordered cat-skin to be called once more , and soon saw the white finger , and the ring that he had put on it whilst they were dancing : so he seized her hand , and kept fast hold of it , and when she wanted to loose herself and spring away , the fur cloak fell off a little on one side , and the starry dress sparkled underneath it . then he got hold of the fur and tore it off , and her golden hair and beautiful form were seen , and she could no longer hide herself : so she washed the soot and ashes from her face , and showed herself to be the most beautiful princess upon the face of the earth . but the king said , ' you are my beloved bride , and we will never more be parted from each other . ' and the wedding feast was held , and a merry day it was , as ever was heard of or seen in that country , or indeed in any other .