a merchant , who had three daughters , was once setting out upon a journey ; but before he went he asked each daughter what gift he should bring back for her . the eldest wished for pearls ; the second for jewels ; but the third , who was called lily , said , ' dear father , bring me a rose . ' now it was no easy task to find a rose , for it was the middle of winter ; yet as she was his prettiest daughter , and was very fond of flowers , her father said he would try what he could do . so he kissed all three , and bid them goodbye . and when the time came for him to go home , he had bought pearls and jewels for the two eldest , but he had sought everywhere in vain for the rose ; and when he went into any garden and asked for such a thing , the people laughed at him , and asked him whether he thought roses grew in snow . this grieved him very much , for lily was his dearest child ; and as he was journeying home , thinking what he should bring her , he came to a fine castle ; and around the castle was a garden , in one half of which it seemed to be summer-time and in the other half winter . on one side the finest flowers were in full bloom , and on the other everything looked dreary and buried in the snow . ' a lucky hit ! ' said he , as he called to his servant , and told him to go to a beautiful bed of roses that was there , and bring him away one of the finest flowers . this done , they were riding away well pleased , when up sprang a fierce lion , and roared out , ' whoever has stolen my roses shall be eaten up alive ! ' then the man said , ' i knew not that the garden belonged to you ; can nothing save my life ? ' ' no ! ' said the lion , ' nothing , unless you undertake to give me whatever meets you on your return home ; if you agree to this , i will give you your life , and the rose too for your daughter . ' but the man was unwilling to do so and said , ' it may be my youngest daughter , who loves me most , and always runs to meet me when i go home . ' then the servant was greatly frightened , and said , ' it may perhaps be only a cat or a dog . ' and at last the man yielded with a heavy heart , and took the rose ; and said he would give the lion whatever should meet him first on his return . and as he came near home , it was lily , his youngest and dearest daughter , that met him ; she came running , and kissed him , and welcomed him home ; and when she saw that he had brought her the rose , she was still more glad . but her father began to be very sorrowful , and to weep , saying , ' alas , my dearest child ! i have bought this flower at a high price , for i have said i would give you to a wild lion ; and when he has you , he will tear you in pieces , and eat you . ' then he told her all that had happened , and said she should not go , let what would happen . but she comforted him , and said , ' dear father , the word you have given must be kept ; i will go to the lion , and soothe him : perhaps he will let me come safe home again . ' the next morning she asked the way she was to go , and took leave of her father , and went forth with a bold heart into the wood . but the lion was an enchanted prince . by day he and all his court were lions , but in the evening they took their right forms again . and when lily came to the castle , he welcomed her so courteously that she agreed to marry him . the wedding-feast was held , and they lived happily together a long time . the prince was only to be seen as soon as evening came , and then he held his court ; but every morning he left his bride , and went away by himself , she knew not whither , till the night came again . after some time he said to her , ' tomorrow there will be a great feast in your father ' s house , for your eldest sister is to be married ; and if you wish to go and visit her my lions shall lead you thither . ' then she rejoiced much at the thoughts of seeing her father once more , and set out with the lions ; and everyone was overjoyed to see her , for they had thought her dead long since . but she told them how happy she was , and stayed till the feast was over , and then went back to the wood . her second sister was soon after married , and when lily was asked to go to the wedding , she said to the prince , ' i will not go alone this time--you must go with me . ' but he would not , and said that it would be a very hazardous thing ; for if the least ray of the torch-light should fall upon him his enchantment would become still worse , for he should be changed into a dove , and be forced to wander about the world for seven long years . however , she gave him no rest , and said she would take care no light should fall upon him . so at last they set out together , and took with them their little child ; and she chose a large hall with thick walls for him to sit in while the wedding-torches were lighted ; but , unluckily , no one saw that there was a crack in the door . then the wedding was held with great pomp , but as the train came from the church , and passed with the torches before the hall , a very small ray of light fell upon the prince . in a moment he disappeared , and when his wife came in and looked for him , she found only a white dove ; and it said to her , ' seven years must i fly up and down over the face of the earth , but every now and then i will let fall a white feather , that will show you the way i am going ; follow it , and at last you may overtake and set me free . ' this said , he flew out at the door , and poor lily followed ; and every now and then a white feather fell , and showed her the way she was to journey . thus she went roving on through the wide world , and looked neither to the right hand nor to the left , nor took any rest , for seven years . then she began to be glad , and thought to herself that the time was fast coming when all her troubles should end ; yet repose was still far off , for one day as she was travelling on she missed the white feather , and when she lifted up her eyes she could nowhere see the dove . ' now , ' thought she to herself , ' no aid of man can be of use to me . ' so she went to the sun and said , ' thou shinest everywhere , on the hill ' s top and the valley ' s depth--hast thou anywhere seen my white dove ? ' ' no , ' said the sun , ' i have not seen it ; but i will give thee a casket--open it when thy hour of need comes . ' so she thanked the sun , and went on her way till eventide ; and when the moon arose , she cried unto it , and said , ' thou shinest through the night , over field and grove--hast thou nowhere seen my white dove ? ' ' no , ' said the moon , ' i cannot help thee but i will give thee an egg--break it when need comes . ' then she thanked the moon , and went on till the night-wind blew ; and she raised up her voice to it , and said , ' thou blowest through every tree and under every leaf--hast thou not seen my white dove ? ' ' no , ' said the night-wind , ' but i will ask three other winds ; perhaps they have seen it . ' then the east wind and the west wind came , and said they too had not seen it , but the south wind said , ' i have seen the white dove--he has fled to the red sea , and is changed once more into a lion , for the seven years are passed away , and there he is fighting with a dragon ; and the dragon is an enchanted princess , who seeks to separate him from you . ' then the night-wind said , ' i will give thee counsel . go to the red sea ; on the right shore stand many rods--count them , and when thou comest to the eleventh , break it off , and smite the dragon with it ; and so the lion will have the victory , and both of them will appear to you in their own forms . then look round and thou wilt see a griffin , winged like bird , sitting by the red sea ; jump on to his back with thy beloved one as quickly as possible , and he will carry you over the waters to your home . i will also give thee this nut , ' continued the night-wind . ' when you are half-way over , throw it down , and out of the waters will immediately spring up a high nut-tree on which the griffin will be able to rest , otherwise he would not have the strength to bear you the whole way ; if , therefore , thou dost forget to throw down the nut , he will let you both fall into the sea . ' so our poor wanderer went forth , and found all as the night-wind had said ; and she plucked the eleventh rod , and smote the dragon , and the lion forthwith became a prince , and the dragon a princess again . but no sooner was the princess released from the spell , than she seized the prince by the arm and sprang on to the griffin ' s back , and went off carrying the prince away with her . thus the unhappy traveller was again forsaken and forlorn ; but she took heart and said , ' as far as the wind blows , and so long as the cock crows , i will journey on , till i find him once again . ' she went on for a long , long way , till at length she came to the castle whither the princess had carried the prince ; and there was a feast got ready , and she heard that the wedding was about to be held . ' heaven aid me now ! ' said she ; and she took the casket that the sun had given her , and found that within it lay a dress as dazzling as the sun itself . so she put it on , and went into the palace , and all the people gazed upon her ; and the dress pleased the bride so much that she asked whether it was to be sold . ' not for gold and silver . ' said she , ' but for flesh and blood . ' the princess asked what she meant , and she said , ' let me speak with the bridegroom this night in his chamber , and i will give thee the dress . ' at last the princess agreed , but she told her chamberlain to give the prince a sleeping draught , that he might not hear or see her . when evening came , and the prince had fallen asleep , she was led into his chamber , and she sat herself down at his feet , and said : ' i have followed thee seven years . i have been to the sun , the moon , and the night-wind , to seek thee , and at last i have helped thee to overcome the dragon . wilt thou then forget me quite ? ' but the prince all the time slept so soundly , that her voice only passed over him , and seemed like the whistling of the wind among the fir-trees . then poor lily was led away , and forced to give up the golden dress ; and when she saw that there was no help for her , she went out into a meadow , and sat herself down and wept . but as she sat she bethought herself of the egg that the moon had given her ; and when she broke it , there ran out a hen and twelve chickens of pure gold , that played about , and then nestled under the old one ' s wings , so as to form the most beautiful sight in the world . and she rose up and drove them before her , till the bride saw them from her window , and was so pleased that she came forth and asked her if she would sell the brood . ' not for gold or silver , but for flesh and blood : let me again this evening speak with the bridegroom in his chamber , and i will give thee the whole brood . ' then the princess thought to betray her as before , and agreed to what she asked : but when the prince went to his chamber he asked the chamberlain why the wind had whistled so in the night . and the chamberlain told him all--how he had given him a sleeping draught , and how a poor maiden had come and spoken to him in his chamber , and was to come again that night . then the prince took care to throw away the sleeping draught ; and when lily came and began again to tell him what woes had befallen her , and how faithful and true to him she had been , he knew his beloved wife ' s voice , and sprang up , and said , ' you have awakened me as from a dream , for the strange princess had thrown a spell around me , so that i had altogether forgotten you ; but heaven hath sent you to me in a lucky hour . ' and they stole away out of the palace by night unawares , and seated themselves on the griffin , who flew back with them over the red sea . when they were half-way across lily let the nut fall into the water , and immediately a large nut-tree arose from the sea , whereon the griffin rested for a while , and then carried them safely home . there they found their child , now grown up to be comely and fair ; and after all their troubles they lived happily together to the end of their days .