there was once upon a time a woman who was a real witch and had two daughters , one ugly and wicked , and this one she loved because she was her own daughter , and one beautiful and good , and this one she hated , because she was her stepdaughter . the stepdaughter once had a pretty apron , which the other fancied so much that she became envious , and told her mother that she must and would have that apron . ' be quiet , my child , ' said the old woman , ' and you shall have it . your stepsister has long deserved death ; tonight when she is asleep i will come and cut her head off . only be careful that you are at the far side of the bed , and push her well to the front . ' it would have been all over with the poor girl if she had not just then been standing in a corner , and heard everything . all day long she dared not go out of doors , and when bedtime had come , the witch ' s daughter got into bed first , so as to lie at the far side , but when she was asleep , the other pushed her gently to the front , and took for herself the place at the back , close by the wall . in the night , the old woman came creeping in , she held an axe in her right hand , and felt with her left to see if anyone were lying at the outside , and then she grasped the axe with both hands , and cut her own child ' s head off . when she had gone away , the girl got up and went to her sweetheart , who was called roland , and knocked at his door . when he came out , she said to him : ' listen , dearest roland , we must fly in all haste ; my stepmother wanted to kill me , but has struck her own child . when daylight comes , and she sees what she has done , we shall be lost . ' ' but , ' said roland , ' i counsel you first to take away her magic wand , or we cannot escape if she pursues us . ' the maiden fetched the magic wand , and she took the dead girl ' s head and dropped three drops of blood on the ground , one in front of the bed , one in the kitchen , and one on the stairs . then she hurried away with her lover . when the old witch got up next morning , she called her daughter , and wanted to give her the apron , but she did not come . then the witch cried : ' where are you ? ' ' here , on the stairs , i am sweeping , ' answered the first drop of blood . the old woman went out , but saw no one on the stairs , and cried again : ' where are you ? ' ' here in the kitchen , i am warming myself , ' cried the second drop of blood . she went into the kitchen , but found no one . then she cried again : ' where are you ? ' ' ah , here in the bed , i am sleeping , ' cried the third drop of blood . she went into the room to the bed . what did she see there ? her own child , whose head she had cut off , bathed in her blood . the witch fell into a passion , sprang to the window , and as she could look forth quite far into the world , she perceived her stepdaughter hurrying away with her sweetheart roland . ' that shall not help you , ' cried she , ' even if you have got a long way off , you shall still not escape me . ' she put on her many-league boots , in which she covered an hour ' s walk at every step , and it was not long before she overtook them . the girl , however , when she saw the old woman striding towards her , changed , with her magic wand , her sweetheart roland into a lake , and herself into a duck swimming in the middle of it . the witch placed herself on the shore , threw breadcrumbs in , and went to endless trouble to entice the duck ; but the duck did not let herself be enticed , and the old woman had to go home at night as she had come . at this the girl and her sweetheart roland resumed their natural shapes again , and they walked on the whole night until daybreak . then the maiden changed herself into a beautiful flower which stood in the midst of a briar hedge , and her sweetheart roland into a fiddler . it was not long before the witch came striding up towards them , and said to the musician : ' dear musician , may i pluck that beautiful flower for myself ? ' ' oh , yes , ' he replied , ' i will play to you while you do it . ' as she was hastily creeping into the hedge and was just going to pluck the flower , knowing perfectly well who the flower was , he began to play , and whether she would or not , she was forced to dance , for it was a magical dance . the faster he played , the more violent springs was she forced to make , and the thorns tore her clothes from her body , and pricked her and wounded her till she bled , and as he did not stop , she had to dance till she lay dead on the ground . as they were now set free , roland said : ' now i will go to my father and arrange for the wedding . ' ' then in the meantime i will stay here and wait for you , ' said the girl , ' and that no one may recognize me , i will change myself into a red stone landmark . ' then roland went away , and the girl stood like a red landmark in the field and waited for her beloved . but when roland got home , he fell into the snares of another , who so fascinated him that he forgot the maiden . the poor girl remained there a long time , but at length , as he did not return at all , she was sad , and changed herself into a flower , and thought : ' someone will surely come this way , and trample me down . ' it befell , however , that a shepherd kept his sheep in the field and saw the flower , and as it was so pretty , plucked it , took it with him , and laid it away in his chest . from that time forth , strange things happened in the shepherd ' s house . when he arose in the morning , all the work was already done , the room was swept , the table and benches cleaned , the fire in the hearth was lighted , and the water was fetched , and at noon , when he came home , the table was laid , and a good dinner served . he could not conceive how this came to pass , for he never saw a human being in his house , and no one could have concealed himself in it . he was certainly pleased with this good attendance , but still at last he was so afraid that he went to a wise woman and asked for her advice . the wise woman said : ' there is some enchantment behind it , listen very early some morning if anything is moving in the room , and if you see anything , no matter what it is , throw a white cloth over it , and then the magic will be stopped . ' the shepherd did as she bade him , and next morning just as day dawned , he saw the chest open , and the flower come out . swiftly he sprang towards it , and threw a white cloth over it . instantly the transformation came to an end , and a beautiful girl stood before him , who admitted to him that she had been the flower , and that up to this time she had attended to his house-keeping . she told him her story , and as she pleased him he asked her if she would marry him , but she answered : ' no , ' for she wanted to remain faithful to her sweetheart roland , although he had deserted her . nevertheless , she promised not to go away , but to continue keeping house for the shepherd . and now the time drew near when roland ' s wedding was to be celebrated , and then , according to an old custom in the country , it was announced that all the girls were to be present at it , and sing in honour of the bridal pair . when the faithful maiden heard of this , she grew so sad that she thought her heart would break , and she would not go thither , but the other girls came and took her . when it came to her turn to sing , she stepped back , until at last she was the only one left , and then she could not refuse . but when she began her song , and it reached roland ' s ears , he sprang up and cried : ' i know the voice , that is the true bride , i will have no other ! ' everything he had forgotten , and which had vanished from his mind , had suddenly come home again to his heart . then the faithful maiden held her wedding with her sweetheart roland , and grief came to an end and joy began .