a shepherd had a faithful dog , called sultan , who was grown very old , and had lost all his teeth . and one day when the shepherd and his wife were standing together before the house the shepherd said , ' i will shoot old sultan tomorrow morning , for he is of no use now . ' but his wife said , ' pray let the poor faithful creature live ; he has served us well a great many years , and we ought to give him a livelihood for the rest of his days . ' ' but what can we do with him ? ' said the shepherd , ' he has not a tooth in his head , and the thieves don ' t care for him at all ; to be sure he has served us , but then he did it to earn his livelihood ; tomorrow shall be his last day , depend upon it . ' poor sultan , who was lying close by them , heard all that the shepherd and his wife said to one another , and was very much frightened to think tomorrow would be his last day ; so in the evening he went to his good friend the wolf , who lived in the wood , and told him all his sorrows , and how his master meant to kill him in the morning . ' make yourself easy , ' said the wolf , ' i will give you some good advice . your master , you know , goes out every morning very early with his wife into the field ; and they take their little child with them , and lay it down behind the hedge in the shade while they are at work . now do you lie down close by the child , and pretend to be watching it , and i will come out of the wood and run away with it ; you must run after me as fast as you can , and i will let it drop ; then you may carry it back , and they will think you have saved their child , and will be so thankful to you that they will take care of you as long as you live . ' the dog liked this plan very well ; and accordingly so it was managed . the wolf ran with the child a little way ; the shepherd and his wife screamed out ; but sultan soon overtook him , and carried the poor little thing back to his master and mistress . then the shepherd patted him on the head , and said , ' old sultan has saved our child from the wolf , and therefore he shall live and be well taken care of , and have plenty to eat . wife , go home , and give him a good dinner , and let him have my old cushion to sleep on as long as he lives . ' so from this time forward sultan had all that he could wish for . soon afterwards the wolf came and wished him joy , and said , ' now , my good fellow , you must tell no tales , but turn your head the other way when i want to taste one of the old shepherd ' s fine fat sheep . ' ' no , ' said the sultan ; ' i will be true to my master . ' however , the wolf thought he was in joke , and came one night to get a dainty morsel . but sultan had told his master what the wolf meant to do ; so he laid wait for him behind the barn door , and when the wolf was busy looking out for a good fat sheep , he had a stout cudgel laid about his back , that combed his locks for him finely . then the wolf was very angry , and called sultan ' an old rogue , ' and swore he would have his revenge . so the next morning the wolf sent the boar to challenge sultan to come into the wood to fight the matter . now sultan had nobody he could ask to be his second but the shepherd ' s old three-legged cat ; so he took her with him , and as the poor thing limped along with some trouble , she stuck up her tail straight in the air . the wolf and the wild boar were first on the ground ; and when they espied their enemies coming , and saw the cat ' s long tail standing straight in the air , they thought she was carrying a sword for sultan to fight with ; and every time she limped , they thought she was picking up a stone to throw at them ; so they said they should not like this way of fighting , and the boar lay down behind a bush , and the wolf jumped up into a tree . sultan and the cat soon came up , and looked about and wondered that no one was there . the boar , however , had not quite hidden himself , for his ears stuck out of the bush ; and when he shook one of them a little , the cat , seeing something move , and thinking it was a mouse , sprang upon it , and bit and scratched it , so that the boar jumped up and grunted , and ran away , roaring out , ' look up in the tree , there sits the one who is to blame . ' so they looked up , and espied the wolf sitting amongst the branches ; and they called him a cowardly rascal , and would not suffer him to come down till he was heartily ashamed of himself , and had promised to be good friends again with old sultan .