there was once an old castle , that stood in the middle of a deep gloomy wood , and in the castle lived an old fairy . now this fairy could take any shape she pleased . all the day long she flew about in the form of an owl , or crept about the country like a cat ; but at night she always became an old woman again . when any young man came within a hundred paces of her castle , he became quite fixed , and could not move a step till she came and set him free ; which she would not do till he had given her his word never to come there again : but when any pretty maiden came within that space she was changed into a bird , and the fairy put her into a cage , and hung her up in a chamber in the castle . there were seven hundred of these cages hanging in the castle , and all with beautiful birds in them . now there was once a maiden whose name was jorinda . she was prettier than all the pretty girls that ever were seen before , and a shepherd lad , whose name was jorindel , was very fond of her , and they were soon to be married . one day they went to walk in the wood , that they might be alone ; and jorindel said , ' we must take care that we don ' t go too near to the fairy ' s castle . ' it was a beautiful evening ; the last rays of the setting sun shone bright through the long stems of the trees upon the green underwood beneath , and the turtle-doves sang from the tall birches . jorinda sat down to gaze upon the sun ; jorindel sat by her side ; and both felt sad , they knew not why ; but it seemed as if they were to be parted from one another for ever . they had wandered a long way ; and when they looked to see which way they should go home , they found themselves at a loss to know what path to take . the sun was setting fast , and already half of its circle had sunk behind the hill : jorindel on a sudden looked behind him , and saw through the bushes that they had , without knowing it , sat down close under the old walls of the castle . then he shrank for fear , turned pale , and trembled . jorinda was just singing , ' the ring-dove sang from the willow spray , well-a-day ! well-a-day ! he mourn ' d for the fate of his darling mate , well-a-day ! ' when her song stopped suddenly . jorindel turned to see the reason , and beheld his jorinda changed into a nightingale , so that her song ended with a mournful _jug , jug_ . an owl with fiery eyes flew three times round them , and three times screamed : ' tu whu ! tu whu ! tu whu ! ' jorindel could not move ; he stood fixed as a stone , and could neither weep , nor speak , nor stir hand or foot . and now the sun went quite down ; the gloomy night came ; the owl flew into a bush ; and a moment after the old fairy came forth pale and meagre , with staring eyes , and a nose and chin that almost met one another . she mumbled something to herself , seized the nightingale , and went away with it in her hand . poor jorindel saw the nightingale was gone--but what could he do ? he could not speak , he could not move from the spot where he stood . at last the fairy came back and sang with a hoarse voice : ' till the prisoner is fast , and her doom is cast , there stay ! oh , stay ! when the charm is around her , and the spell has bound her , hie away ! away ! ' on a sudden jorindel found himself free . then he fell on his knees before the fairy , and prayed her to give him back his dear jorinda : but she laughed at him , and said he should never see her again ; then she went her way . he prayed , he wept , he sorrowed , but all in vain . ' alas ! ' he said , ' what will become of me ? ' he could not go back to his own home , so he went to a strange village , and employed himself in keeping sheep . many a time did he walk round and round as near to the hated castle as he dared go , but all in vain ; he heard or saw nothing of jorinda . at last he dreamt one night that he found a beautiful purple flower , and that in the middle of it lay a costly pearl ; and he dreamt that he plucked the flower , and went with it in his hand into the castle , and that everything he touched with it was disenchanted , and that there he found his jorinda again . in the morning when he awoke , he began to search over hill and dale for this pretty flower ; and eight long days he sought for it in vain : but on the ninth day , early in the morning , he found the beautiful purple flower ; and in the middle of it was a large dewdrop , as big as a costly pearl . then he plucked the flower , and set out and travelled day and night , till he came again to the castle . he walked nearer than a hundred paces to it , and yet he did not become fixed as before , but found that he could go quite close up to the door . jorindel was very glad indeed to see this . then he touched the door with the flower , and it sprang open ; so that he went in through the court , and listened when he heard so many birds singing . at last he came to the chamber where the fairy sat , with the seven hundred birds singing in the seven hundred cages . when she saw jorindel she was very angry , and screamed with rage ; but she could not come within two yards of him , for the flower he held in his hand was his safeguard . he looked around at the birds , but alas ! there were many , many nightingales , and how then should he find out which was his jorinda ? while he was thinking what to do , he saw the fairy had taken down one of the cages , and was making the best of her way off through the door . he ran or flew after her , touched the cage with the flower , and jorinda stood before him , and threw her arms round his neck looking as beautiful as ever , as beautiful as when they walked together in the wood . then he touched all the other birds with the flower , so that they all took their old forms again ; and he took jorinda home , where they were married , and lived happily together many years : and so did a good many other lads , whose maidens had been forced to sing in the old fairy ' s cages by themselves , much longer than they liked .