there was once upon a time a queen to whom god had given no children . every morning she went into the garden and prayed to god in heaven to bestow on her a son or a daughter . then an angel from heaven came to her and said : ' be at rest , you shall have a son with the power of wishing , so that whatsoever in the world he wishes for , that shall he have . ' then she went to the king , and told him the joyful tidings , and when the time was come she gave birth to a son , and the king was filled with gladness . every morning she went with the child to the garden where the wild beasts were kept , and washed herself there in a clear stream . it happened once when the child was a little older , that it was lying in her arms and she fell asleep . then came the old cook , who knew that the child had the power of wishing , and stole it away , and he took a hen , and cut it in pieces , and dropped some of its blood on the queen ' s apron and on her dress . then he carried the child away to a secret place , where a nurse was obliged to suckle it , and he ran to the king and accused the queen of having allowed her child to be taken from her by the wild beasts . when the king saw the blood on her apron , he believed this , fell into such a passion that he ordered a high tower to be built , in which neither sun nor moon could be seen and had his wife put into it , and walled up . here she was to stay for seven years without meat or drink , and die of hunger . but god sent two angels from heaven in the shape of white doves , which flew to her twice a day , and carried her food until the seven years were over . the cook , however , thought to himself : ' if the child has the power of wishing , and i am here , he might very easily get me into trouble . ' so he left the palace and went to the boy , who was already big enough to speak , and said to him : ' wish for a beautiful palace for yourself with a garden , and all else that pertains to it . ' scarcely were the words out of the boy ' s mouth , when everything was there that he had wished for . after a while the cook said to him : ' it is not well for you to be so alone , wish for a pretty girl as a companion . ' then the king ' s son wished for one , and she immediately stood before him , and was more beautiful than any painter could have painted her . the two played together , and loved each other with all their hearts , and the old cook went out hunting like a nobleman . the thought occurred to him , however , that the king ' s son might some day wish to be with his father , and thus bring him into great peril . so he went out and took the maiden aside , and said : ' tonight when the boy is asleep , go to his bed and plunge this knife into his heart , and bring me his heart and tongue , and if you do not do it , you shall lose your life . ' thereupon he went away , and when he returned next day she had not done it , and said : ' why should i shed the blood of an innocent boy who has never harmed anyone ? ' the cook once more said : ' if you do not do it , it shall cost you your own life . ' when he had gone away , she had a little hind brought to her , and ordered her to be killed , and took her heart and tongue , and laid them on a plate , and when she saw the old man coming , she said to the boy : ' lie down in your bed , and draw the clothes over you . ' then the wicked wretch came in and said : ' where are the boy ' s heart and tongue ? ' the girl reached the plate to him , but the king ' s son threw off the quilt , and said : ' you old sinner , why did you want to kill me ? now will i pronounce thy sentence . you shall become a black poodle and have a gold collar round your neck , and shall eat burning coals , till the flames burst forth from your throat . ' and when he had spoken these words , the old man was changed into a poodle dog , and had a gold collar round his neck , and the cooks were ordered to bring up some live coals , and these he ate , until the flames broke forth from his throat . the king ' s son remained there a short while longer , and he thought of his mother , and wondered if she were still alive . at length he said to the maiden : ' i will go home to my own country ; if you will go with me , i will provide for you . ' ' ah , ' she replied , ' the way is so long , and what shall i do in a strange land where i am unknown ? ' as she did not seem quite willing , and as they could not be parted from each other , he wished that she might be changed into a beautiful pink , and took her with him . then he went away to his own country , and the poodle had to run after him . he went to the tower in which his mother was confined , and as it was so high , he wished for a ladder which would reach up to the very top . then he mounted up and looked inside , and cried : ' beloved mother , lady queen , are you still alive , or are you dead ? ' she answered : ' i have just eaten , and am still satisfied , ' for she thought the angels were there . said he : ' i am your dear son , whom the wild beasts were said to have torn from your arms ; but i am alive still , and will soon set you free . ' then he descended again , and went to his father , and caused himself to be announced as a strange huntsman , and asked if he could offer him service . the king said yes , if he was skilful and could get game for him , he should come to him , but that deer had never taken up their quarters in any part of the district or country . then the huntsman promised to procure as much game for him as he could possibly use at the royal table . so he summoned all the huntsmen together , and bade them go out into the forest with him . and he went with them and made them form a great circle , open at one end where he stationed himself , and began to wish . two hundred deer and more came running inside the circle at once , and the huntsmen shot them . then they were all placed on sixty country carts , and driven home to the king , and for once he was able to deck his table with game , after having had none at all for years . now the king felt great joy at this , and commanded that his entire household should eat with him next day , and made a great feast . when they were all assembled together , he said to the huntsman : ' as you are so clever , you shall sit by me . ' he replied : ' lord king , your majesty must excuse me , i am a poor huntsman . ' but the king insisted on it , and said : ' you shall sit by me , ' until he did it . whilst he was sitting there , he thought of his dearest mother , and wished that one of the king ' s principal servants would begin to speak of her , and would ask how it was faring with the queen in the tower , and if she were alive still , or had perished . hardly had he formed the wish than the marshal began , and said : ' your majesty , we live joyously here , but how is the queen living in the tower ? is she still alive , or has she died ? ' but the king replied : ' she let my dear son be torn to pieces by wild beasts ; i will not have her named . ' then the huntsman arose and said : ' gracious lord father she is alive still , and i am her son , and i was not carried away by wild beasts , but by that wretch the old cook , who tore me from her arms when she was asleep , and sprinkled her apron with the blood of a chicken . ' thereupon he took the dog with the golden collar , and said : ' that is the wretch ! ' and caused live coals to be brought , and these the dog was compelled to devour before the sight of all , until flames burst forth from its throat . on this the huntsman asked the king if he would like to see the dog in his true shape , and wished him back into the form of the cook , in which he stood immediately , with his white apron , and his knife by his side . when the king saw him he fell into a passion , and ordered him to be cast into the deepest dungeon . then the huntsman spoke further and said : ' father , will you see the maiden who brought me up so tenderly and who was afterwards to murder me , but did not do it , though her own life depended on it ? ' the king replied : ' yes , i would like to see her . ' the son said : ' most gracious father , i will show her to you in the form of a beautiful flower , ' and he thrust his hand into his pocket and brought forth the pink , and placed it on the royal table , and it was so beautiful that the king had never seen one to equal it . then the son said : ' now will i show her to you in her own form , ' and wished that she might become a maiden , and she stood there looking so beautiful that no painter could have made her look more so . and the king sent two waiting-maids and two attendants into the tower , to fetch the queen and bring her to the royal table . but when she was led in she ate nothing , and said : ' the gracious and merciful god who has supported me in the tower , will soon set me free . ' she lived three days more , and then died happily , and when she was buried , the two white doves which had brought her food to the tower , and were angels of heaven , followed her body and seated themselves on her grave . the aged king ordered the cook to be torn in four pieces , but grief consumed the king ' s own heart , and he soon died . his son married the beautiful maiden whom he had brought with him as a flower in his pocket , and whether they are still alive or not , is known to god .