there were two brothers who were both soldiers ; the one was rich and the other poor . the poor man thought he would try to better himself ; so , pulling off his red coat , he became a gardener , and dug his ground well , and sowed turnips . when the seed came up , there was one plant bigger than all the rest ; and it kept getting larger and larger , and seemed as if it would never cease growing ; so that it might have been called the prince of turnips for there never was such a one seen before , and never will again . at last it was so big that it filled a cart , and two oxen could hardly draw it ; and the gardener knew not what in the world to do with it , nor whether it would be a blessing or a curse to him . one day he said to himself , ' what shall i do with it ? if i sell it , it will bring no more than another ; and for eating , the little turnips are better than this ; the best thing perhaps is to carry it and give it to the king as a mark of respect . ' then he yoked his oxen , and drew the turnip to the court , and gave it to the king . ' what a wonderful thing ! ' said the king ; ' i have seen many strange things , but such a monster as this i never saw . where did you get the seed ? or is it only your good luck ? if so , you are a true child of fortune . ' ' ah , no ! ' answered the gardener , ' i am no child of fortune ; i am a poor soldier , who never could get enough to live upon ; so i laid aside my red coat , and set to work , tilling the ground . i have a brother , who is rich , and your majesty knows him well , and all the world knows him ; but because i am poor , everybody forgets me . ' the king then took pity on him , and said , ' you shall be poor no longer . i will give you so much that you shall be even richer than your brother . ' then he gave him gold and lands and flocks , and made him so rich that his brother ' s fortune could not at all be compared with his . when the brother heard of all this , and how a turnip had made the gardener so rich , he envied him sorely , and bethought himself how he could contrive to get the same good fortune for himself . however , he determined to manage more cleverly than his brother , and got together a rich present of gold and fine horses for the king ; and thought he must have a much larger gift in return ; for if his brother had received so much for only a turnip , what must his present be worth ? the king took the gift very graciously , and said he knew not what to give in return more valuable and wonderful than the great turnip ; so the soldier was forced to put it into a cart , and drag it home with him . when he reached home , he knew not upon whom to vent his rage and spite ; and at length wicked thoughts came into his head , and he resolved to kill his brother . so he hired some villains to murder him ; and having shown them where to lie in ambush , he went to his brother , and said , ' dear brother , i have found a hidden treasure ; let us go and dig it up , and share it between us . ' the other had no suspicions of his roguery : so they went out together , and as they were travelling along , the murderers rushed out upon him , bound him , and were going to hang him on a tree . but whilst they were getting all ready , they heard the trampling of a horse at a distance , which so frightened them that they pushed their prisoner neck and shoulders together into a sack , and swung him up by a cord to the tree , where they left him dangling , and ran away . meantime he worked and worked away , till he made a hole large enough to put out his head . when the horseman came up , he proved to be a student , a merry fellow , who was journeying along on his nag , and singing as he went . as soon as the man in the sack saw him passing under the tree , he cried out , ' good morning ! good morning to thee , my friend ! ' the student looked about everywhere ; and seeing no one , and not knowing where the voice came from , cried out , ' who calls me ? ' then the man in the tree answered , ' lift up thine eyes , for behold here i sit in the sack of wisdom ; here have i , in a short time , learned great and wondrous things . compared to this seat , all the learning of the schools is as empty air . a little longer , and i shall know all that man can know , and shall come forth wiser than the wisest of mankind . here i discern the signs and motions of the heavens and the stars ; the laws that control the winds ; the number of the sands on the seashore ; the healing of the sick ; the virtues of all simples , of birds , and of precious stones . wert thou but once here , my friend , though wouldst feel and own the power of knowledge . the student listened to all this and wondered much ; at last he said , ' blessed be the day and hour when i found you ; cannot you contrive to let me into the sack for a little while ? ' then the other answered , as if very unwillingly , ' a little space i may allow thee to sit here , if thou wilt reward me well and entreat me kindly ; but thou must tarry yet an hour below , till i have learnt some little matters that are yet unknown to me . ' so the student sat himself down and waited a while ; but the time hung heavy upon him , and he begged earnestly that he might ascend forthwith , for his thirst for knowledge was great . then the other pretended to give way , and said , ' thou must let the sack of wisdom descend , by untying yonder cord , and then thou shalt enter . ' so the student let him down , opened the sack , and set him free . ' now then , ' cried he , ' let me ascend quickly . ' as he began to put himself into the sack heels first , ' wait a while , ' said the gardener , ' that is not the way . ' then he pushed him in head first , tied up the sack , and soon swung up the searcher after wisdom dangling in the air . ' how is it with thee , friend ? ' said he , ' dost thou not feel that wisdom comes unto thee ? rest there in peace , till thou art a wiser man than thou wert . ' so saying , he trotted off on the student ' s nag , and left the poor fellow to gather wisdom till somebody should come and let him down .