a great king of a land far away in the east had a daughter who was very beautiful , but so proud , and haughty , and conceited , that none of the princes who came to ask her in marriage was good enough for her , and she only made sport of them . once upon a time the king held a great feast , and asked thither all her suitors ; and they all sat in a row , ranged according to their rank--kings , and princes , and dukes , and earls , and counts , and barons , and knights . then the princess came in , and as she passed by them she had something spiteful to say to every one . the first was too fat : ' he ' s as round as a tub , ' said she . the next was too tall : ' what a maypole ! ' said she . the next was too short : ' what a dumpling ! ' said she . the fourth was too pale , and she called him ' wallface . ' the fifth was too red , so she called him ' coxcomb . ' the sixth was not straight enough ; so she said he was like a green stick , that had been laid to dry over a baker ' s oven . and thus she had some joke to crack upon every one : but she laughed more than all at a good king who was there . ' look at him , ' said she ; ' his beard is like an old mop ; he shall be called grisly-beard . ' so the king got the nickname of grisly-beard . but the old king was very angry when he saw how his daughter behaved , and how she ill-treated all his guests ; and he vowed that , willing or unwilling , she should marry the first man , be he prince or beggar , that came to the door . two days after there came by a travelling fiddler , who began to play under the window and beg alms ; and when the king heard him , he said , ' let him come in . ' so they brought in a dirty-looking fellow ; and when he had sung before the king and the princess , he begged a boon . then the king said , ' you have sung so well , that i will give you my daughter for your wife . ' the princess begged and prayed ; but the king said , ' i have sworn to give you to the first comer , and i will keep my word . ' so words and tears were of no avail ; the parson was sent for , and she was married to the fiddler . when this was over the king said , ' now get ready to go--you must not stay here--you must travel on with your husband . ' then the fiddler went his way , and took her with him , and they soon came to a great wood . ' pray , ' said she , ' whose is this wood ? ' ' it belongs to king grisly-beard , ' answered he ; ' hadst thou taken him , all had been thine . ' ' ah ! unlucky wretch that i am ! ' sighed she ; ' would that i had married king grisly-beard ! ' next they came to some fine meadows . ' whose are these beautiful green meadows ? ' said she . ' they belong to king grisly-beard , hadst thou taken him , they had all been thine . ' ' ah ! unlucky wretch that i am ! ' said she ; ' would that i had married king grisly-beard ! ' then they came to a great city . ' whose is this noble city ? ' said she . ' it belongs to king grisly-beard ; hadst thou taken him , it had all been thine . ' ' ah ! wretch that i am ! ' sighed she ; ' why did i not marry king grisly-beard ? ' ' that is no business of mine , ' said the fiddler : ' why should you wish for another husband ? am not i good enough for you ? ' at last they came to a small cottage . ' what a paltry place ! ' said she ; ' to whom does that little dirty hole belong ? ' then the fiddler said , ' that is your and my house , where we are to live . ' ' where are your servants ? ' cried she . ' what do we want with servants ? ' said he ; ' you must do for yourself whatever is to be done . now make the fire , and put on water and cook my supper , for i am very tired . ' but the princess knew nothing of making fires and cooking , and the fiddler was forced to help her . when they had eaten a very scanty meal they went to bed ; but the fiddler called her up very early in the morning to clean the house . thus they lived for two days : and when they had eaten up all there was in the cottage , the man said , ' wife , we can ' t go on thus , spending money and earning nothing . you must learn to weave baskets . ' then he went out and cut willows , and brought them home , and she began to weave ; but it made her fingers very sore . ' i see this work won ' t do , ' said he : ' try and spin ; perhaps you will do that better . ' so she sat down and tried to spin ; but the threads cut her tender fingers till the blood ran . ' see now , ' said the fiddler , ' you are good for nothing ; you can do no work : what a bargain i have got ! however , i ' ll try and set up a trade in pots and pans , and you shall stand in the market and sell them . ' ' alas ! ' sighed she , ' if any of my father ' s court should pass by and see me standing in the market , how they will laugh at me ! ' but her husband did not care for that , and said she must work , if she did not wish to die of hunger . at first the trade went well ; for many people , seeing such a beautiful woman , went to buy her wares , and paid their money without thinking of taking away the goods . they lived on this as long as it lasted ; and then her husband bought a fresh lot of ware , and she sat herself down with it in the corner of the market ; but a drunken soldier soon came by , and rode his horse against her stall , and broke all her goods into a thousand pieces . then she began to cry , and knew not what to do . ' ah ! what will become of me ? ' said she ; ' what will my husband say ? ' so she ran home and told him all . ' who would have thought you would have been so silly , ' said he , ' as to put an earthenware stall in the corner of the market , where everybody passes ? but let us have no more crying ; i see you are not fit for this sort of work , so i have been to the king ' s palace , and asked if they did not want a kitchen-maid ; and they say they will take you , and there you will have plenty to eat . ' thus the princess became a kitchen-maid , and helped the cook to do all the dirtiest work ; but she was allowed to carry home some of the meat that was left , and on this they lived . she had not been there long before she heard that the king ' s eldest son was passing by , going to be married ; and she went to one of the windows and looked out . everything was ready , and all the pomp and brightness of the court was there . then she bitterly grieved for the pride and folly which had brought her so low . and the servants gave her some of the rich meats , which she put into her basket to take home . all on a sudden , as she was going out , in came the king ' s son in golden clothes ; and when he saw a beautiful woman at the door , he took her by the hand , and said she should be his partner in the dance ; but she trembled for fear , for she saw that it was king grisly-beard , who was making sport of her . however , he kept fast hold , and led her in ; and the cover of the basket came off , so that the meats in it fell about . then everybody laughed and jeered at her ; and she was so abashed , that she wished herself a thousand feet deep in the earth . she sprang to the door to run away ; but on the steps king grisly-beard overtook her , and brought her back and said , ' fear me not ! i am the fiddler who has lived with you in the hut . i brought you there because i really loved you . i am also the soldier that overset your stall . i have done all this only to cure you of your silly pride , and to show you the folly of your ill-treatment of me . now all is over : you have learnt wisdom , and it is time to hold our marriage feast . ' then the chamberlains came and brought her the most beautiful robes ; and her father and his whole court were there already , and welcomed her home on her marriage . joy was in every face and every heart . the feast was grand ; they danced and sang ; all were merry ; and i only wish that you and i had been of the party .