a farmer had a horse that had been an excellent faithful servant to him : but he was now grown too old to work ; so the farmer would give him nothing more to eat , and said , ' i want you no longer , so take yourself off out of my stable ; i shall not take you back again until you are stronger than a lion . ' then he opened the door and turned him adrift . the poor horse was very melancholy , and wandered up and down in the wood , seeking some little shelter from the cold wind and rain . presently a fox met him : ' what ' s the matter , my friend ? ' said he , ' why do you hang down your head and look so lonely and woe-begone ? ' ' ah ! ' replied the horse , ' justice and avarice never dwell in one house ; my master has forgotten all that i have done for him so many years , and because i can no longer work he has turned me adrift , and says unless i become stronger than a lion he will not take me back again ; what chance can i have of that ? he knows i have none , or he would not talk so . ' however , the fox bid him be of good cheer , and said , ' i will help you ; lie down there , stretch yourself out quite stiff , and pretend to be dead . ' the horse did as he was told , and the fox went straight to the lion who lived in a cave close by , and said to him , ' a little way off lies a dead horse ; come with me and you may make an excellent meal of his carcase . ' the lion was greatly pleased , and set off immediately ; and when they came to the horse , the fox said , ' you will not be able to eat him comfortably here ; i ' ll tell you what--i will tie you fast to his tail , and then you can draw him to your den , and eat him at your leisure . ' this advice pleased the lion , so he laid himself down quietly for the fox to make him fast to the horse . but the fox managed to tie his legs together and bound all so hard and fast that with all his strength he could not set himself free . when the work was done , the fox clapped the horse on the shoulder , and said , ' jip ! dobbin ! jip ! ' then up he sprang , and moved off , dragging the lion behind him . the beast began to roar and bellow , till all the birds of the wood flew away for fright ; but the horse let him sing on , and made his way quietly over the fields to his master ' s house . ' here he is , master , ' said he , ' i have got the better of him ' : and when the farmer saw his old servant , his heart relented , and he said . ' thou shalt stay in thy stable and be well taken care of . ' and so the poor old horse had plenty to eat , and lived--till he died .