there was a king who had twelve beautiful daughters . they slept in twelve beds all in one room ; and when they went to bed , the doors were shut and locked up ; but every morning their shoes were found to be quite worn through as if they had been danced in all night ; and yet nobody could find out how it happened , or where they had been . then the king made it known to all the land , that if any person could discover the secret , and find out where it was that the princesses danced in the night , he should have the one he liked best for his wife , and should be king after his death ; but whoever tried and did not succeed , after three days and nights , should be put to death . a king ' s son soon came . he was well entertained , and in the evening was taken to the chamber next to the one where the princesses lay in their twelve beds . there he was to sit and watch where they went to dance ; and , in order that nothing might pass without his hearing it , the door of his chamber was left open . but the king ' s son soon fell asleep ; and when he awoke in the morning he found that the princesses had all been dancing , for the soles of their shoes were full of holes . the same thing happened the second and third night : so the king ordered his head to be cut off . after him came several others ; but they had all the same luck , and all lost their lives in the same manner . now it chanced that an old soldier , who had been wounded in battle and could fight no longer , passed through the country where this king reigned : and as he was travelling through a wood , he met an old woman , who asked him where he was going . ' i hardly know where i am going , or what i had better do , ' said the soldier ; ' but i think i should like very well to find out where it is that the princesses dance , and then in time i might be a king . ' ' well , ' said the old dame , ' that is no very hard task : only take care not to drink any of the wine which one of the princesses will bring to you in the evening ; and as soon as she leaves you pretend to be fast asleep . ' then she gave him a cloak , and said , ' as soon as you put that on you will become invisible , and you will then be able to follow the princesses wherever they go . ' when the soldier heard all this good counsel , he determined to try his luck : so he went to the king , and said he was willing to undertake the task . he was as well received as the others had been , and the king ordered fine royal robes to be given him ; and when the evening came he was led to the outer chamber . just as he was going to lie down , the eldest of the princesses brought him a cup of wine ; but the soldier threw it all away secretly , taking care not to drink a drop . then he laid himself down on his bed , and in a little while began to snore very loud as if he was fast asleep . when the twelve princesses heard this they laughed heartily ; and the eldest said , ' this fellow too might have done a wiser thing than lose his life in this way ! ' then they rose up and opened their drawers and boxes , and took out all their fine clothes , and dressed themselves at the glass , and skipped about as if they were eager to begin dancing . but the youngest said , ' i don ' t know how it is , while you are so happy i feel very uneasy ; i am sure some mischance will befall us . ' ' you simpleton , ' said the eldest , ' you are always afraid ; have you forgotten how many kings ' sons have already watched in vain ? and as for this soldier , even if i had not given him his sleeping draught , he would have slept soundly enough . ' when they were all ready , they went and looked at the soldier ; but he snored on , and did not stir hand or foot : so they thought they were quite safe ; and the eldest went up to her own bed and clapped her hands , and the bed sank into the floor and a trap-door flew open . the soldier saw them going down through the trap-door one after another , the eldest leading the way ; and thinking he had no time to lose , he jumped up , put on the cloak which the old woman had given him , and followed them ; but in the middle of the stairs he trod on the gown of the youngest princess , and she cried out to her sisters , ' all is not right ; someone took hold of my gown . ' ' you silly creature ! ' said the eldest , ' it is nothing but a nail in the wall . ' then down they all went , and at the bottom they found themselves in a most delightful grove of trees ; and the leaves were all of silver , and glittered and sparkled beautifully . the soldier wished to take away some token of the place ; so he broke off a little branch , and there came a loud noise from the tree . then the youngest daughter said again , ' i am sure all is not right--did not you hear that noise ? that never happened before . ' but the eldest said , ' it is only our princes , who are shouting for joy at our approach . ' then they came to another grove of trees , where all the leaves were of gold ; and afterwards to a third , where the leaves were all glittering diamonds . and the soldier broke a branch from each ; and every time there was a loud noise , which made the youngest sister tremble with fear ; but the eldest still said , it was only the princes , who were crying for joy . so they went on till they came to a great lake ; and at the side of the lake there lay twelve little boats with twelve handsome princes in them , who seemed to be waiting there for the princesses . one of the princesses went into each boat , and the soldier stepped into the same boat with the youngest . as they were rowing over the lake , the prince who was in the boat with the youngest princess and the soldier said , ' i do not know why it is , but though i am rowing with all my might we do not get on so fast as usual , and i am quite tired : the boat seems very heavy today . ' ' it is only the heat of the weather , ' said the princess : ' i feel it very warm too . ' on the other side of the lake stood a fine illuminated castle , from which came the merry music of horns and trumpets . there they all landed , and went into the castle , and each prince danced with his princess ; and the soldier , who was all the time invisible , danced with them too ; and when any of the princesses had a cup of wine set by her , he drank it all up , so that when she put the cup to her mouth it was empty . at this , too , the youngest sister was terribly frightened , but the eldest always silenced her . they danced on till three o ' clock in the morning , and then all their shoes were worn out , so that they were obliged to leave off . the princes rowed them back again over the lake ( but this time the soldier placed himself in the boat with the eldest princess ) ; and on the opposite shore they took leave of each other , the princesses promising to come again the next night . when they came to the stairs , the soldier ran on before the princesses , and laid himself down ; and as the twelve sisters slowly came up very much tired , they heard him snoring in his bed ; so they said , ' now all is quite safe ' ; then they undressed themselves , put away their fine clothes , pulled off their shoes , and went to bed . in the morning the soldier said nothing about what had happened , but determined to see more of this strange adventure , and went again the second and third night ; and every thing happened just as before ; the princesses danced each time till their shoes were worn to pieces , and then returned home . however , on the third night the soldier carried away one of the golden cups as a token of where he had been . as soon as the time came when he was to declare the secret , he was taken before the king with the three branches and the golden cup ; and the twelve princesses stood listening behind the door to hear what he would say . and when the king asked him . ' where do my twelve daughters dance at night ? ' he answered , ' with twelve princes in a castle under ground . ' and then he told the king all that had happened , and showed him the three branches and the golden cup which he had brought with him . then the king called for the princesses , and asked them whether what the soldier said was true : and when they saw that they were discovered , and that it was of no use to deny what had happened , they confessed it all . and the king asked the soldier which of them he would choose for his wife ; and he answered , ' i am not very young , so i will have the eldest . ' --and they were married that very day , and the soldier was chosen to be the king ' s heir .