there was once upon a time an old goat who had seven little kids , and loved them with all the love of a mother for her children . one day she wanted to go into the forest and fetch some food . so she called all seven to her and said : ' dear children , i have to go into the forest , be on your guard against the wolf ; if he comes in , he will devour you all--skin , hair , and everything . the wretch often disguises himself , but you will know him at once by his rough voice and his black feet . ' the kids said : ' dear mother , we will take good care of ourselves ; you may go away without any anxiety . ' then the old one bleated , and went on her way with an easy mind . it was not long before someone knocked at the house-door and called : ' open the door , dear children ; your mother is here , and has brought something back with her for each of you . ' but the little kids knew that it was the wolf , by the rough voice . ' we will not open the door , ' cried they , ' you are not our mother . she has a soft , pleasant voice , but your voice is rough ; you are the wolf ! ' then the wolf went away to a shopkeeper and bought himself a great lump of chalk , ate this and made his voice soft with it . then he came back , knocked at the door of the house , and called : ' open the door , dear children , your mother is here and has brought something back with her for each of you . ' but the wolf had laid his black paws against the window , and the children saw them and cried : ' we will not open the door , our mother has not black feet like you : you are the wolf ! ' then the wolf ran to a baker and said : ' i have hurt my feet , rub some dough over them for me . ' and when the baker had rubbed his feet over , he ran to the miller and said : ' strew some white meal over my feet for me . ' the miller thought to himself : ' the wolf wants to deceive someone , ' and refused ; but the wolf said : ' if you will not do it , i will devour you . ' then the miller was afraid , and made his paws white for him . truly , this is the way of mankind . so now the wretch went for the third time to the house-door , knocked at it and said : ' open the door for me , children , your dear little mother has come home , and has brought every one of you something back from the forest with her . ' the little kids cried : ' first show us your paws that we may know if you are our dear little mother . ' then he put his paws in through the window and when the kids saw that they were white , they believed that all he said was true , and opened the door . but who should come in but the wolf ! they were terrified and wanted to hide themselves . one sprang under the table , the second into the bed , the third into the stove , the fourth into the kitchen , the fifth into the cupboard , the sixth under the washing-bowl , and the seventh into the clock-case . but the wolf found them all , and used no great ceremony ; one after the other he swallowed them down his throat . the youngest , who was in the clock-case , was the only one he did not find . when the wolf had satisfied his appetite he took himself off , laid himself down under a tree in the green meadow outside , and began to sleep . soon afterwards the old goat came home again from the forest . ah ! what a sight she saw there ! the house-door stood wide open . the table , chairs , and benches were thrown down , the washing-bowl lay broken to pieces , and the quilts and pillows were pulled off the bed . she sought her children , but they were nowhere to be found . she called them one after another by name , but no one answered . at last , when she came to the youngest , a soft voice cried : ' dear mother , i am in the clock-case . ' she took the kid out , and it told her that the wolf had come and had eaten all the others . then you may imagine how she wept over her poor children . at length in her grief she went out , and the youngest kid ran with her . when they came to the meadow , there lay the wolf by the tree and snored so loud that the branches shook . she looked at him on every side and saw that something was moving and struggling in his gorged belly . ' ah , heavens , ' she said , ' is it possible that my poor children whom he has swallowed down for his supper , can be still alive ? ' then the kid had to run home and fetch scissors , and a needle and thread , and the goat cut open the monster ' s stomach , and hardly had she made one cut , than one little kid thrust its head out , and when she had cut farther , all six sprang out one after another , and were all still alive , and had suffered no injury whatever , for in his greediness the monster had swallowed them down whole . what rejoicing there was ! they embraced their dear mother , and jumped like a tailor at his wedding . the mother , however , said : ' now go and look for some big stones , and we will fill the wicked beast ' s stomach with them while he is still asleep . ' then the seven kids dragged the stones thither with all speed , and put as many of them into this stomach as they could get in ; and the mother sewed him up again in the greatest haste , so that he was not aware of anything and never once stirred . when the wolf at length had had his fill of sleep , he got on his legs , and as the stones in his stomach made him very thirsty , he wanted to go to a well to drink . but when he began to walk and to move about , the stones in his stomach knocked against each other and rattled . then cried he : ' what rumbles and tumbles against my poor bones ? i thought ' twas six kids , but it feels like big stones . ' and when he got to the well and stooped over the water to drink , the heavy stones made him fall in , and he drowned miserably . when the seven kids saw that , they came running to the spot and cried aloud : ' the wolf is dead ! the wolf is dead ! ' and danced for joy round about the well with their mother .