some men are born to good luck : all they do or try to do comes right--all that falls to them is so much gain--all their geese are swans--all their cards are trumps--toss them which way you will , they will always , like poor puss , alight upon their legs , and only move on so much the faster . the world may very likely not always think of them as they think of themselves , but what care they for the world ? what can it know about the matter ? one of these lucky beings was neighbour hans . seven long years he had worked hard for his master . at last he said , ' master , my time is up ; i must go home and see my poor mother once more : so pray pay me my wages and let me go . ' and the master said , ' you have been a faithful and good servant , hans , so your pay shall be handsome . ' then he gave him a lump of silver as big as his head . hans took out his pocket-handkerchief , put the piece of silver into it , threw it over his shoulder , and jogged off on his road homewards . as he went lazily on , dragging one foot after another , a man came in sight , trotting gaily along on a capital horse . ' ah ! ' said hans aloud , ' what a fine thing it is to ride on horseback ! there he sits as easy and happy as if he was at home , in the chair by his fireside ; he trips against no stones , saves shoe-leather , and gets on he hardly knows how . ' hans did not speak so softly but the horseman heard it all , and said , ' well , friend , why do you go on foot then ? ' ' ah ! ' said he , ' i have this load to carry : to be sure it is silver , but it is so heavy that i can ' t hold up my head , and you must know it hurts my shoulder sadly . ' ' what do you say of making an exchange ? ' said the horseman . ' i will give you my horse , and you shall give me the silver ; which will save you a great deal of trouble in carrying such a heavy load about with you . ' ' with all my heart , ' said hans : ' but as you are so kind to me , i must tell you one thing--you will have a weary task to draw that silver about with you . ' however , the horseman got off , took the silver , helped hans up , gave him the bridle into one hand and the whip into the other , and said , ' when you want to go very fast , smack your lips loudly together , and cry " jip ! " ' hans was delighted as he sat on the horse , drew himself up , squared his elbows , turned out his toes , cracked his whip , and rode merrily off , one minute whistling a merry tune , and another singing , ' no care and no sorrow , a fig for the morrow ! we ' ll laugh and be merry , sing neigh down derry ! ' after a time he thought he should like to go a little faster , so he smacked his lips and cried ' jip ! ' away went the horse full gallop ; and before hans knew what he was about , he was thrown off , and lay on his back by the road-side . his horse would have ran off , if a shepherd who was coming by , driving a cow , had not stopped it . hans soon came to himself , and got upon his legs again , sadly vexed , and said to the shepherd , ' this riding is no joke , when a man has the luck to get upon a beast like this that stumbles and flings him off as if it would break his neck . however , i ' m off now once for all : i like your cow now a great deal better than this smart beast that played me this trick , and has spoiled my best coat , you see , in this puddle ; which , by the by , smells not very like a nosegay . one can walk along at one ' s leisure behind that cow--keep good company , and have milk , butter , and cheese , every day , into the bargain . what would i give to have such a prize ! ' ' well , ' said the shepherd , ' if you are so fond of her , i will change my cow for your horse ; i like to do good to my neighbours , even though i lose by it myself . ' ' done ! ' said hans , merrily . ' what a noble heart that good man has ! ' thought he . then the shepherd jumped upon the horse , wished hans and the cow good morning , and away he rode . hans brushed his coat , wiped his face and hands , rested a while , and then drove off his cow quietly , and thought his bargain a very lucky one . ' if i have only a piece of bread ( and i certainly shall always be able to get that ) , i can , whenever i like , eat my butter and cheese with it ; and when i am thirsty i can milk my cow and drink the milk : and what can i wish for more ? ' when he came to an inn , he halted , ate up all his bread , and gave away his last penny for a glass of beer . when he had rested himself he set off again , driving his cow towards his mother ' s village . but the heat grew greater as soon as noon came on , till at last , as he found himself on a wide heath that would take him more than an hour to cross , he began to be so hot and parched that his tongue clave to the roof of his mouth . ' i can find a cure for this , ' thought he ; ' now i will milk my cow and quench my thirst ' : so he tied her to the stump of a tree , and held his leathern cap to milk into ; but not a drop was to be had . who would have thought that this cow , which was to bring him milk and butter and cheese , was all that time utterly dry ? hans had not thought of looking to that . while he was trying his luck in milking , and managing the matter very clumsily , the uneasy beast began to think him very troublesome ; and at last gave him such a kick on the head as knocked him down ; and there he lay a long while senseless . luckily a butcher soon came by , driving a pig in a wheelbarrow . ' what is the matter with you , my man ? ' said the butcher , as he helped him up . hans told him what had happened , how he was dry , and wanted to milk his cow , but found the cow was dry too . then the butcher gave him a flask of ale , saying , ' there , drink and refresh yourself ; your cow will give you no milk : don ' t you see she is an old beast , good for nothing but the slaughter-house ? ' ' alas , alas ! ' said hans , ' who would have thought it ? what a shame to take my horse , and give me only a dry cow ! if i kill her , what will she be good for ? i hate cow-beef ; it is not tender enough for me . if it were a pig now--like that fat gentleman you are driving along at his ease--one could do something with it ; it would at any rate make sausages . ' ' well , ' said the butcher , ' i don ' t like to say no , when one is asked to do a kind , neighbourly thing . to please you i will change , and give you my fine fat pig for the cow . ' ' heaven reward you for your kindness and self-denial ! ' said hans , as he gave the butcher the cow ; and taking the pig off the wheel-barrow , drove it away , holding it by the string that was tied to its leg . so on he jogged , and all seemed now to go right with him : he had met with some misfortunes , to be sure ; but he was now well repaid for all . how could it be otherwise with such a travelling companion as he had at last got ? the next man he met was a countryman carrying a fine white goose . the countryman stopped to ask what was o ' clock ; this led to further chat ; and hans told him all his luck , how he had so many good bargains , and how all the world went gay and smiling with him . the countryman then began to tell his tale , and said he was going to take the goose to a christening . ' feel , ' said he , ' how heavy it is , and yet it is only eight weeks old . whoever roasts and eats it will find plenty of fat upon it , it has lived so well ! ' ' you ' re right , ' said hans , as he weighed it in his hand ; ' but if you talk of fat , my pig is no trifle . ' meantime the countryman began to look grave , and shook his head . ' hark ye ! ' said he , ' my worthy friend , you seem a good sort of fellow , so i can ' t help doing you a kind turn . your pig may get you into a scrape . in the village i just came from , the squire has had a pig stolen out of his sty . i was dreadfully afraid when i saw you that you had got the squire ' s pig . if you have , and they catch you , it will be a bad job for you . the least they will do will be to throw you into the horse-pond . can you swim ? ' poor hans was sadly frightened . ' good man , ' cried he , ' pray get me out of this scrape . i know nothing of where the pig was either bred or born ; but he may have been the squire ' s for aught i can tell : you know this country better than i do , take my pig and give me the goose . ' ' i ought to have something into the bargain , ' said the countryman ; ' give a fat goose for a pig , indeed ! ' tis not everyone would do so much for you as that . however , i will not be hard upon you , as you are in trouble . ' then he took the string in his hand , and drove off the pig by a side path ; while hans went on the way homewards free from care . ' after all , ' thought he , ' that chap is pretty well taken in . i don ' t care whose pig it is , but wherever it came from it has been a very good friend to me . i have much the best of the bargain . first there will be a capital roast ; then the fat will find me in goose-grease for six months ; and then there are all the beautiful white feathers . i will put them into my pillow , and then i am sure i shall sleep soundly without rocking . how happy my mother will be ! talk of a pig , indeed ! give me a fine fat goose . ' as he came to the next village , he saw a scissor-grinder with his wheel , working and singing , ' o ' er hill and o ' er dale so happy i roam , work light and live well , all the world is my home ; then who so blythe , so merry as i ? ' hans stood looking on for a while , and at last said , ' you must be well off , master grinder ! you seem so happy at your work . ' ' yes , ' said the other , ' mine is a golden trade ; a good grinder never puts his hand into his pocket without finding money in it--but where did you get that beautiful goose ? ' ' i did not buy it , i gave a pig for it . ' ' and where did you get the pig ? ' ' i gave a cow for it . ' ' and the cow ? ' ' i gave a horse for it . ' ' and the horse ? ' ' i gave a lump of silver as big as my head for it . ' ' and the silver ? ' ' oh ! i worked hard for that seven long years . ' ' you have thriven well in the world hitherto , ' said the grinder , ' now if you could find money in your pocket whenever you put your hand in it , your fortune would be made . ' ' very true : but how is that to be managed ? ' ' how ? why , you must turn grinder like myself , ' said the other ; ' you only want a grindstone ; the rest will come of itself . here is one that is but little the worse for wear : i would not ask more than the value of your goose for it--will you buy ? ' ' how can you ask ? ' said hans ; ' i should be the happiest man in the world , if i could have money whenever i put my hand in my pocket : what could i want more ? there ' s the goose . ' ' now , ' said the grinder , as he gave him a common rough stone that lay by his side , ' this is a most capital stone ; do but work it well enough , and you can make an old nail cut with it . ' hans took the stone , and went his way with a light heart : his eyes sparkled for joy , and he said to himself , ' surely i must have been born in a lucky hour ; everything i could want or wish for comes of itself . people are so kind ; they seem really to think i do them a favour in letting them make me rich , and giving me good bargains . ' meantime he began to be tired , and hungry too , for he had given away his last penny in his joy at getting the cow . at last he could go no farther , for the stone tired him sadly : and he dragged himself to the side of a river , that he might take a drink of water , and rest a while . so he laid the stone carefully by his side on the bank : but , as he stooped down to drink , he forgot it , pushed it a little , and down it rolled , plump into the stream . for a while he watched it sinking in the deep clear water ; then sprang up and danced for joy , and again fell upon his knees and thanked heaven , with tears in his eyes , for its kindness in taking away his only plague , the ugly heavy stone . ' how happy am i ! ' cried he ; ' nobody was ever so lucky as i . ' then up he got with a light heart , free from all his troubles , and walked on till he reached his mother ' s house , and told her how very easy the road to good luck was .