it was the middle of winter , when the broad flakes of snow were falling around , that the queen of a country many thousand miles off sat working at her window . the frame of the window was made of fine black ebony , and as she sat looking out upon the snow , she pricked her finger , and three drops of blood fell upon it . then she gazed thoughtfully upon the red drops that sprinkled the white snow , and said , ' would that my little daughter may be as white as that snow , as red as that blood , and as black as this ebony windowframe ! ' and so the little girl really did grow up ; her skin was as white as snow , her cheeks as rosy as the blood , and her hair as black as ebony ; and she was called snowdrop . but this queen died ; and the king soon married another wife , who became queen , and was very beautiful , but so vain that she could not bear to think that anyone could be handsomer than she was . she had a fairy looking-glass , to which she used to go , and then she would gaze upon herself in it , and say : ' tell me , glass , tell me true ! of all the ladies in the land , who is fairest , tell me , who ? ' and the glass had always answered : ' thou , queen , art the fairest in all the land . ' but snowdrop grew more and more beautiful ; and when she was seven years old she was as bright as the day , and fairer than the queen herself . then the glass one day answered the queen , when she went to look in it as usual : ' thou , queen , art fair , and beauteous to see , but snowdrop is lovelier far than thee ! ' when she heard this she turned pale with rage and envy , and called to one of her servants , and said , ' take snowdrop away into the wide wood , that i may never see her any more . ' then the servant led her away ; but his heart melted when snowdrop begged him to spare her life , and he said , ' i will not hurt you , thou pretty child . ' so he left her by herself ; and though he thought it most likely that the wild beasts would tear her in pieces , he felt as if a great weight were taken off his heart when he had made up his mind not to kill her but to leave her to her fate , with the chance of someone finding and saving her . then poor snowdrop wandered along through the wood in great fear ; and the wild beasts roared about her , but none did her any harm . in the evening she came to a cottage among the hills , and went in to rest , for her little feet would carry her no further . everything was spruce and neat in the cottage : on the table was spread a white cloth , and there were seven little plates , seven little loaves , and seven little glasses with wine in them ; and seven knives and forks laid in order ; and by the wall stood seven little beds . as she was very hungry , she picked a little piece of each loaf and drank a very little wine out of each glass ; and after that she thought she would lie down and rest . so she tried all the little beds ; but one was too long , and another was too short , till at last the seventh suited her : and there she laid herself down and went to sleep . by and by in came the masters of the cottage . now they were seven little dwarfs , that lived among the mountains , and dug and searched for gold . they lighted up their seven lamps , and saw at once that all was not right . the first said , ' who has been sitting on my stool ? ' the second , ' who has been eating off my plate ? ' the third , ' who has been picking my bread ? ' the fourth , ' who has been meddling with my spoon ? ' the fifth , ' who has been handling my fork ? ' the sixth , ' who has been cutting with my knife ? ' the seventh , ' who has been drinking my wine ? ' then the first looked round and said , ' who has been lying on my bed ? ' and the rest came running to him , and everyone cried out that somebody had been upon his bed . but the seventh saw snowdrop , and called all his brethren to come and see her ; and they cried out with wonder and astonishment and brought their lamps to look at her , and said , ' good heavens ! what a lovely child she is ! ' and they were very glad to see her , and took care not to wake her ; and the seventh dwarf slept an hour with each of the other dwarfs in turn , till the night was gone . in the morning snowdrop told them all her story ; and they pitied her , and said if she would keep all things in order , and cook and wash and knit and spin for them , she might stay where she was , and they would take good care of her . then they went out all day long to their work , seeking for gold and silver in the mountains : but snowdrop was left at home ; and they warned her , and said , ' the queen will soon find out where you are , so take care and let no one in . ' but the queen , now that she thought snowdrop was dead , believed that she must be the handsomest lady in the land ; and she went to her glass and said : ' tell me , glass , tell me true ! of all the ladies in the land , who is fairest , tell me , who ? ' and the glass answered : ' thou , queen , art the fairest in all this land : but over the hills , in the greenwood shade , where the seven dwarfs their dwelling have made , there snowdrop is hiding her head ; and she is lovelier far , o queen ! than thee . ' then the queen was very much frightened ; for she knew that the glass always spoke the truth , and was sure that the servant had betrayed her . and she could not bear to think that anyone lived who was more beautiful than she was ; so she dressed herself up as an old pedlar , and went her way over the hills , to the place where the dwarfs dwelt . then she knocked at the door , and cried , ' fine wares to sell ! ' snowdrop looked out at the window , and said , ' good day , good woman ! what have you to sell ? ' ' good wares , fine wares , ' said she ; ' laces and bobbins of all colours . ' ' i will let the old lady in ; she seems to be a very good sort of body , ' thought snowdrop , as she ran down and unbolted the door . ' bless me ! ' said the old woman , ' how badly your stays are laced ! let me lace them up with one of my nice new laces . ' snowdrop did not dream of any mischief ; so she stood before the old woman ; but she set to work so nimbly , and pulled the lace so tight , that snowdrop ' s breath was stopped , and she fell down as if she were dead . ' there ' s an end to all thy beauty , ' said the spiteful queen , and went away home . in the evening the seven dwarfs came home ; and i need not say how grieved they were to see their faithful snowdrop stretched out upon the ground , as if she was quite dead . however , they lifted her up , and when they found what ailed her , they cut the lace ; and in a little time she began to breathe , and very soon came to life again . then they said , ' the old woman was the queen herself ; take care another time , and let no one in when we are away . ' when the queen got home , she went straight to her glass , and spoke to it as before ; but to her great grief it still said : ' thou , queen , art the fairest in all this land : but over the hills , in the greenwood shade , where the seven dwarfs their dwelling have made , there snowdrop is hiding her head ; and she is lovelier far , o queen ! than thee . ' then the blood ran cold in her heart with spite and malice , to see that snowdrop still lived ; and she dressed herself up again , but in quite another dress from the one she wore before , and took with her a poisoned comb . when she reached the dwarfs ' cottage , she knocked at the door , and cried , ' fine wares to sell ! ' but snowdrop said , ' i dare not let anyone in . ' then the queen said , ' only look at my beautiful combs ! ' and gave her the poisoned one . and it looked so pretty , that she took it up and put it into her hair to try it ; but the moment it touched her head , the poison was so powerful that she fell down senseless . ' there you may lie , ' said the queen , and went her way . but by good luck the dwarfs came in very early that evening ; and when they saw snowdrop lying on the ground , they thought what had happened , and soon found the poisoned comb . and when they took it away she got well , and told them all that had passed ; and they warned her once more not to open the door to anyone . meantime the queen went home to her glass , and shook with rage when she read the very same answer as before ; and she said , ' snowdrop shall die , if it cost me my life . ' so she went by herself into her chamber , and got ready a poisoned apple : the outside looked very rosy and tempting , but whoever tasted it was sure to die . then she dressed herself up as a peasant ' s wife , and travelled over the hills to the dwarfs ' cottage , and knocked at the door ; but snowdrop put her head out of the window and said , ' i dare not let anyone in , for the dwarfs have told me not . ' ' do as you please , ' said the old woman , ' but at any rate take this pretty apple ; i will give it you . ' ' no , ' said snowdrop , ' i dare not take it . ' ' you silly girl ! ' answered the other , ' what are you afraid of ? do you think it is poisoned ? come ! do you eat one part , and i will eat the other . ' now the apple was so made up that one side was good , though the other side was poisoned . then snowdrop was much tempted to taste , for the apple looked so very nice ; and when she saw the old woman eat , she could wait no longer . but she had scarcely put the piece into her mouth , when she fell down dead upon the ground . ' this time nothing will save thee , ' said the queen ; and she went home to her glass , and at last it said : ' thou , queen , art the fairest of all the fair . ' and then her wicked heart was glad , and as happy as such a heart could be . when evening came , and the dwarfs had gone home , they found snowdrop lying on the ground : no breath came from her lips , and they were afraid that she was quite dead . they lifted her up , and combed her hair , and washed her face with wine and water ; but all was in vain , for the little girl seemed quite dead . so they laid her down upon a bier , and all seven watched and bewailed her three whole days ; and then they thought they would bury her : but her cheeks were still rosy ; and her face looked just as it did while she was alive ; so they said , ' we will never bury her in the cold ground . ' and they made a coffin of glass , so that they might still look at her , and wrote upon it in golden letters what her name was , and that she was a king ' s daughter . and the coffin was set among the hills , and one of the dwarfs always sat by it and watched . and the birds of the air came too , and bemoaned snowdrop ; and first of all came an owl , and then a raven , and at last a dove , and sat by her side . and thus snowdrop lay for a long , long time , and still only looked as though she was asleep ; for she was even now as white as snow , and as red as blood , and as black as ebony . at last a prince came and called at the dwarfs ' house ; and he saw snowdrop , and read what was written in golden letters . then he offered the dwarfs money , and prayed and besought them to let him take her away ; but they said , ' we will not part with her for all the gold in the world . ' at last , however , they had pity on him , and gave him the coffin ; but the moment he lifted it up to carry it home with him , the piece of apple fell from between her lips , and snowdrop awoke , and said , ' where am i ? ' and the prince said , ' thou art quite safe with me . ' then he told her all that had happened , and said , ' i love you far better than all the world ; so come with me to my father ' s palace , and you shall be my wife . ' and snowdrop consented , and went home with the prince ; and everything was got ready with great pomp and splendour for their wedding . to the feast was asked , among the rest , snowdrop ' s old enemy the queen ; and as she was dressing herself in fine rich clothes , she looked in the glass and said : ' tell me , glass , tell me true ! of all the ladies in the land , who is fairest , tell me , who ? ' and the glass answered : ' thou , lady , art loveliest here , i ween ; but lovelier far is the new-made queen . ' when she heard this she started with rage ; but her envy and curiosity were so great , that she could not help setting out to see the bride . and when she got there , and saw that it was no other than snowdrop , who , as she thought , had been dead a long while , she choked with rage , and fell down and died : but snowdrop and the prince lived and reigned happily over that land many , many years ; and sometimes they went up into the mountains , and paid a visit to the little dwarfs , who had been so kind to snowdrop in her time of need .