once upon a time there was a widow who had two daughters ; one of them was beautiful and industrious , the other ugly and lazy . the mother , however , loved the ugly and lazy one best , because she was her own daughter , and so the other , who was only her stepdaughter , was made to do all the work of the house , and was quite the cinderella of the family . her stepmother sent her out every day to sit by the well in the high road , there to spin until she made her fingers bleed . now it chanced one day that some blood fell on to the spindle , and as the girl stopped over the well to wash it off , the spindle suddenly sprang out of her hand and fell into the well . she ran home crying to tell of her misfortune , but her stepmother spoke harshly to her , and after giving her a violent scolding , said unkindly , ' as you have let the spindle fall into the well you may go yourself and fetch it out . ' the girl went back to the well not knowing what to do , and at last in her distress she jumped into the water after the spindle . she remembered nothing more until she awoke and found herself in a beautiful meadow , full of sunshine , and with countless flowers blooming in every direction . she walked over the meadow , and presently she came upon a baker ' s oven full of bread , and the loaves cried out to her , ' take us out , take us out , or alas ! we shall be burnt to a cinder ; we were baked through long ago . ' so she took the bread-shovel and drew them all out . she went on a little farther , till she came to a tree full of apples . ' shake me , shake me , i pray , ' cried the tree ; ' my apples , one and all , are ripe . ' so she shook the tree , and the apples came falling down upon her like rain ; but she continued shaking until there was not a single apple left upon it . then she carefully gathered the apples together in a heap and walked on again . the next thing she came to was a little house , and there she saw an old woman looking out , with such large teeth , that she was terrified , and turned to run away . but the old woman called after her , ' what are you afraid of , dear child ? stay with me ; if you will do the work of my house properly for me , i will make you very happy . you must be very careful , however , to make my bed in the right way , for i wish you always to shake it thoroughly , so that the feathers fly about ; then they say , down there in the world , that it is snowing ; for i am mother holle . ' the old woman spoke so kindly , that the girl summoned up courage and agreed to enter into her service . she took care to do everything according to the old woman ' s bidding and every time she made the bed she shook it with all her might , so that the feathers flew about like so many snowflakes . the old woman was as good as her word : she never spoke angrily to her , and gave her roast and boiled meats every day . so she stayed on with mother holle for some time , and then she began to grow unhappy . she could not at first tell why she felt sad , but she became conscious at last of great longing to go home ; then she knew she was homesick , although she was a thousand times better off with mother holle than with her mother and sister . after waiting awhile , she went to mother holle and said , ' i am so homesick , that i cannot stay with you any longer , for although i am so happy here , i must return to my own people . ' then mother holle said , ' i am pleased that you should want to go back to your own people , and as you have served me so well and faithfully , i will take you home myself . ' thereupon she led the girl by the hand up to a broad gateway . the gate was opened , and as the girl passed through , a shower of gold fell upon her , and the gold clung to her , so that she was covered with it from head to foot . ' that is a reward for your industry , ' said mother holle , and as she spoke she handed her the spindle which she had dropped into the well . the gate was then closed , and the girl found herself back in the old world close to her mother ' s house . as she entered the courtyard , the cock who was perched on the well , called out : ' cock-a-doodle-doo ! your golden daughter ' s come back to you . ' then she went in to her mother and sister , and as she was so richly covered with gold , they gave her a warm welcome . she related to them all that had happened , and when the mother heard how she had come by her great riches , she thought she should like her ugly , lazy daughter to go and try her fortune . so she made the sister go and sit by the well and spin , and the girl pricked her finger and thrust her hand into a thorn-bush , so that she might drop some blood on to the spindle ; then she threw it into the well , and jumped in herself . like her sister she awoke in the beautiful meadow , and walked over it till she came to the oven . ' take us out , take us out , or alas ! we shall be burnt to a cinder ; we were baked through long ago , ' cried the loaves as before . but the lazy girl answered , ' do you think i am going to dirty my hands for you ? ' and walked on . presently she came to the apple-tree . ' shake me , shake me , i pray ; my apples , one and all , are ripe , ' it cried . but she only answered , ' a nice thing to ask me to do , one of the apples might fall on my head , ' and passed on . at last she came to mother holle ' s house , and as she had heard all about the large teeth from her sister , she was not afraid of them , and engaged herself without delay to the old woman . the first day she was very obedient and industrious , and exerted herself to please mother holle , for she thought of the gold she should get in return . the next day , however , she began to dawdle over her work , and the third day she was more idle still ; then she began to lie in bed in the mornings and refused to get up . worse still , she neglected to make the old woman ' s bed properly , and forgot to shake it so that the feathers might fly about . so mother holle very soon got tired of her , and told her she might go . the lazy girl was delighted at this , and thought to herself , ' the gold will soon be mine . ' mother holle led her , as she had led her sister , to the broad gateway ; but as she was passing through , instead of the shower of gold , a great bucketful of pitch came pouring over her . ' that is in return for your services , ' said the old woman , and she shut the gate . so the lazy girl had to go home covered with pitch , and the cock on the well called out as she saw her : ' cock-a-doodle-doo ! your dirty daughter ' s come back to you . ' but , try what she would , she could not get the pitch off and it stuck to her as long as she lived . little red-cap [ little red riding hood ] once upon a time there was a dear little girl who was loved by everyone who looked at her , but most of all by her grandmother , and there was nothing that she would not have given to the child . once she gave her a little cap of red velvet , which suited her so well that she would never wear anything else ; so she was always called ' little red-cap . ' one day her mother said to her : ' come , little red-cap , here is a piece of cake and a bottle of wine ; take them to your grandmother , she is ill and weak , and they will do her good . set out before it gets hot , and when you are going , walk nicely and quietly and do not run off the path , or you may fall and break the bottle , and then your grandmother will get nothing ; and when you go into her room , don ' t forget to say , " good morning " , and don ' t peep into every corner before you do it . ' ' i will take great care , ' said little red-cap to her mother , and gave her hand on it . the grandmother lived out in the wood , half a league from the village , and just as little red-cap entered the wood , a wolf met her . red-cap did not know what a wicked creature he was , and was not at all afraid of him . ' good day , little red-cap , ' said he . ' thank you kindly , wolf . ' ' whither away so early , little red-cap ? ' ' to my grandmother ' s . ' ' what have you got in your apron ? ' ' cake and wine ; yesterday was baking-day , so poor sick grandmother is to have something good , to make her stronger . ' ' where does your grandmother live , little red-cap ? ' ' a good quarter of a league farther on in the wood ; her house stands under the three large oak-trees , the nut-trees are just below ; you surely must know it , ' replied little red-cap . the wolf thought to himself : ' what a tender young creature ! what a nice plump mouthful--she will be better to eat than the old woman . i must act craftily , so as to catch both . ' so he walked for a short time by the side of little red-cap , and then he said : ' see , little red-cap , how pretty the flowers are about here--why do you not look round ? i believe , too , that you do not hear how sweetly the little birds are singing ; you walk gravely along as if you were going to school , while everything else out here in the wood is merry . ' little red-cap raised her eyes , and when she saw the sunbeams dancing here and there through the trees , and pretty flowers growing everywhere , she thought : ' suppose i take grandmother a fresh nosegay ; that would please her too . it is so early in the day that i shall still get there in good time ' ; and so she ran from the path into the wood to look for flowers . and whenever she had picked one , she fancied that she saw a still prettier one farther on , and ran after it , and so got deeper and deeper into the wood . meanwhile the wolf ran straight to the grandmother ' s house and knocked at the door . ' who is there ? ' ' little red-cap , ' replied the wolf . ' she is bringing cake and wine ; open the door . ' ' lift the latch , ' called out the grandmother , ' i am too weak , and cannot get up . ' the wolf lifted the latch , the door sprang open , and without saying a word he went straight to the grandmother ' s bed , and devoured her . then he put on her clothes , dressed himself in her cap laid himself in bed and drew the curtains . little red-cap , however , had been running about picking flowers , and when she had gathered so many that she could carry no more , she remembered her grandmother , and set out on the way to her . she was surprised to find the cottage-door standing open , and when she went into the room , she had such a strange feeling that she said to herself : ' oh dear ! how uneasy i feel today , and at other times i like being with grandmother so much . ' she called out : ' good morning , ' but received no answer ; so she went to the bed and drew back the curtains . there lay her grandmother with her cap pulled far over her face , and looking very strange . ' oh ! grandmother , ' she said , ' what big ears you have ! ' ' the better to hear you with , my child , ' was the reply . ' but , grandmother , what big eyes you have ! ' she said . ' the better to see you with , my dear . ' ' but , grandmother , what large hands you have ! ' ' the better to hug you with . ' ' oh ! but , grandmother , what a terrible big mouth you have ! ' ' the better to eat you with ! ' and scarcely had the wolf said this , than with one bound he was out of bed and swallowed up red-cap . when the wolf had appeased his appetite , he lay down again in the bed , fell asleep and began to snore very loud . the huntsman was just passing the house , and thought to himself : ' how the old woman is snoring ! i must just see if she wants anything . ' so he went into the room , and when he came to the bed , he saw that the wolf was lying in it . ' do i find you here , you old sinner ! ' said he . ' i have long sought you ! ' then just as he was going to fire at him , it occurred to him that the wolf might have devoured the grandmother , and that she might still be saved , so he did not fire , but took a pair of scissors , and began to cut open the stomach of the sleeping wolf . when he had made two snips , he saw the little red-cap shining , and then he made two snips more , and the little girl sprang out , crying : ' ah , how frightened i have been ! how dark it was inside the wolf ' ; and after that the aged grandmother came out alive also , but scarcely able to breathe . red-cap , however , quickly fetched great stones with which they filled the wolf ' s belly , and when he awoke , he wanted to run away , but the stones were so heavy that he collapsed at once , and fell dead . then all three were delighted . the huntsman drew off the wolf ' s skin and went home with it ; the grandmother ate the cake and drank the wine which red-cap had brought , and revived , but red-cap thought to herself : ' as long as i live , i will never by myself leave the path , to run into the wood , when my mother has forbidden me to do so . ' it also related that once when red-cap was again taking cakes to the old grandmother , another wolf spoke to her , and tried to entice her from the path . red-cap , however , was on her guard , and went straight forward on her way , and told her grandmother that she had met the wolf , and that he had said ' good morning ' to her , but with such a wicked look in his eyes , that if they had not been on the public road she was certain he would have eaten her up . ' well , ' said the grandmother , ' we will shut the door , that he may not come in . ' soon afterwards the wolf knocked , and cried : ' open the door , grandmother , i am little red-cap , and am bringing you some cakes . ' but they did not speak , or open the door , so the grey-beard stole twice or thrice round the house , and at last jumped on the roof , intending to wait until red-cap went home in the evening , and then to steal after her and devour her in the darkness . but the grandmother saw what was in his thoughts . in front of the house was a great stone trough , so she said to the child : ' take the pail , red-cap ; i made some sausages yesterday , so carry the water in which i boiled them to the trough . ' red-cap carried until the great trough was quite full . then the smell of the sausages reached the wolf , and he sniffed and peeped down , and at last stretched out his neck so far that he could no longer keep his footing and began to slip , and slipped down from the roof straight into the great trough , and was drowned . but red-cap went joyously home , and no one ever did anything to harm her again .