an honest farmer had once an ass that had been a faithful servant to him a great many years , but was now growing old and every day more and more unfit for work . his master therefore was tired of keeping him and began to think of putting an end to him ; but the ass , who saw that some mischief was in the wind , took himself slyly off , and began his journey towards the great city , ' for there , ' thought he , ' i may turn musician . ' after he had travelled a little way , he spied a dog lying by the roadside and panting as if he were tired . ' what makes you pant so , my friend ? ' said the ass . ' alas ! ' said the dog , ' my master was going to knock me on the head , because i am old and weak , and can no longer make myself useful to him in hunting ; so i ran away ; but what can i do to earn my livelihood ? ' ' hark ye ! ' said the ass , ' i am going to the great city to turn musician : suppose you go with me , and try what you can do in the same way ? ' the dog said he was willing , and they jogged on together . they had not gone far before they saw a cat sitting in the middle of the road and making a most rueful face . ' pray , my good lady , ' said the ass , ' what ' s the matter with you ? you look quite out of spirits ! ' ' ah , me ! ' said the cat , ' how can one be in good spirits when one ' s life is in danger ? because i am beginning to grow old , and had rather lie at my ease by the fire than run about the house after the mice , my mistress laid hold of me , and was going to drown me ; and though i have been lucky enough to get away from her , i do not know what i am to live upon . ' ' oh , ' said the ass , ' by all means go with us to the great city ; you are a good night singer , and may make your fortune as a musician . ' the cat was pleased with the thought , and joined the party . soon afterwards , as they were passing by a farmyard , they saw a cock perched upon a gate , and screaming out with all his might and main . ' bravo ! ' said the ass ; ' upon my word , you make a famous noise ; pray what is all this about ? ' ' why , ' said the cock , ' i was just now saying that we should have fine weather for our washing-day , and yet my mistress and the cook don ' t thank me for my pains , but threaten to cut off my head tomorrow , and make broth of me for the guests that are coming on sunday ! ' ' heaven forbid ! ' said the ass , ' come with us master chanticleer ; it will be better , at any rate , than staying here to have your head cut off ! besides , who knows ? if we care to sing in tune , we may get up some kind of a concert ; so come along with us . ' ' with all my heart , ' said the cock : so they all four went on jollily together . they could not , however , reach the great city the first day ; so when night came on , they went into a wood to sleep . the ass and the dog laid themselves down under a great tree , and the cat climbed up into the branches ; while the cock , thinking that the higher he sat the safer he should be , flew up to the very top of the tree , and then , according to his custom , before he went to sleep , looked out on all sides of him to see that everything was well . in doing this , he saw afar off something bright and shining and calling to his companions said , ' there must be a house no great way off , for i see a light . ' ' if that be the case , ' said the ass , ' we had better change our quarters , for our lodging is not the best in the world ! ' ' besides , ' added the dog , ' i should not be the worse for a bone or two , or a bit of meat . ' so they walked off together towards the spot where chanticleer had seen the light , and as they drew near it became larger and brighter , till they at last came close to a house in which a gang of robbers lived . the ass , being the tallest of the company , marched up to the window and peeped in . ' well , donkey , ' said chanticleer , ' what do you see ? ' ' what do i see ? ' replied the ass . ' why , i see a table spread with all kinds of good things , and robbers sitting round it making merry . ' ' that would be a noble lodging for us , ' said the cock . ' yes , ' said the ass , ' if we could only get in ' ; so they consulted together how they should contrive to get the robbers out ; and at last they hit upon a plan . the ass placed himself upright on his hind legs , with his forefeet resting against the window ; the dog got upon his back ; the cat scrambled up to the dog ' s shoulders , and the cock flew up and sat upon the cat ' s head . when all was ready a signal was given , and they began their music . the ass brayed , the dog barked , the cat mewed , and the cock screamed ; and then they all broke through the window at once , and came tumbling into the room , amongst the broken glass , with a most hideous clatter ! the robbers , who had been not a little frightened by the opening concert , had now no doubt that some frightful hobgoblin had broken in upon them , and scampered away as fast as they could . the coast once clear , our travellers soon sat down and dispatched what the robbers had left , with as much eagerness as if they had not expected to eat again for a month . as soon as they had satisfied themselves , they put out the lights , and each once more sought out a resting-place to his own liking . the donkey laid himself down upon a heap of straw in the yard , the dog stretched himself upon a mat behind the door , the cat rolled herself up on the hearth before the warm ashes , and the cock perched upon a beam on the top of the house ; and , as they were all rather tired with their journey , they soon fell asleep . but about midnight , when the robbers saw from afar that the lights were out and that all seemed quiet , they began to think that they had been in too great a hurry to run away ; and one of them , who was bolder than the rest , went to see what was going on . finding everything still , he marched into the kitchen , and groped about till he found a match in order to light a candle ; and then , espying the glittering fiery eyes of the cat , he mistook them for live coals , and held the match to them to light it . but the cat , not understanding this joke , sprang at his face , and spat , and scratched at him . this frightened him dreadfully , and away he ran to the back door ; but there the dog jumped up and bit him in the leg ; and as he was crossing over the yard the ass kicked him ; and the cock , who had been awakened by the noise , crowed with all his might . at this the robber ran back as fast as he could to his comrades , and told the captain how a horrid witch had got into the house , and had spat at him and scratched his face with her long bony fingers ; how a man with a knife in his hand had hidden himself behind the door , and stabbed him in the leg ; how a black monster stood in the yard and struck him with a club , and how the devil had sat upon the top of the house and cried out , ' throw the rascal up here ! ' after this the robbers never dared to go back to the house ; but the musicians were so pleased with their quarters that they took up their abode there ; and there they are , i dare say , at this very day .