1 . how they went to the mountains to eat nuts ' the nuts are quite ripe now , ' said chanticleer to his wife partlet , ' suppose we go together to the mountains , and eat as many as we can , before the squirrel takes them all away . ' ' with all my heart , ' said partlet , ' let us go and make a holiday of it together . ' so they went to the mountains ; and as it was a lovely day , they stayed there till the evening . now , whether it was that they had eaten so many nuts that they could not walk , or whether they were lazy and would not , i do not know : however , they took it into their heads that it did not become them to go home on foot . so chanticleer began to build a little carriage of nutshells : and when it was finished , partlet jumped into it and sat down , and bid chanticleer harness himself to it and draw her home . ' that ' s a good joke ! ' said chanticleer ; ' no , that will never do ; i had rather by half walk home ; i ' ll sit on the box and be coachman , if you like , but i ' ll not draw . ' while this was passing , a duck came quacking up and cried out , ' you thieving vagabonds , what business have you in my grounds ? i ' ll give it you well for your insolence ! ' and upon that she fell upon chanticleer most lustily . but chanticleer was no coward , and returned the duck ' s blows with his sharp spurs so fiercely that she soon began to cry out for mercy ; which was only granted her upon condition that she would draw the carriage home for them . this she agreed to do ; and chanticleer got upon the box , and drove , crying , ' now , duck , get on as fast as you can . ' and away they went at a pretty good pace . after they had travelled along a little way , they met a needle and a pin walking together along the road : and the needle cried out , ' stop , stop ! ' and said it was so dark that they could hardly find their way , and such dirty walking they could not get on at all : he told them that he and his friend , the pin , had been at a public-house a few miles off , and had sat drinking till they had forgotten how late it was ; he begged therefore that the travellers would be so kind as to give them a lift in their carriage . chanticleer observing that they were but thin fellows , and not likely to take up much room , told them they might ride , but made them promise not to dirty the wheels of the carriage in getting in , nor to tread on partlet ' s toes . late at night they arrived at an inn ; and as it was bad travelling in the dark , and the duck seemed much tired , and waddled about a good deal from one side to the other , they made up their minds to fix their quarters there : but the landlord at first was unwilling , and said his house was full , thinking they might not be very respectable company : however , they spoke civilly to him , and gave him the egg which partlet had laid by the way , and said they would give him the duck , who was in the habit of laying one every day : so at last he let them come in , and they bespoke a handsome supper , and spent the evening very jollily . early in the morning , before it was quite light , and when nobody was stirring in the inn , chanticleer awakened his wife , and , fetching the egg , they pecked a hole in it , ate it up , and threw the shells into the fireplace : they then went to the pin and needle , who were fast asleep , and seizing them by the heads , stuck one into the landlord ' s easy chair and the other into his handkerchief ; and , having done this , they crept away as softly as possible . however , the duck , who slept in the open air in the yard , heard them coming , and jumping into the brook which ran close by the inn , soon swam out of their reach . an hour or two afterwards the landlord got up , and took his handkerchief to wipe his face , but the pin ran into him and pricked him : then he walked into the kitchen to light his pipe at the fire , but when he stirred it up the eggshells flew into his eyes , and almost blinded him . ' bless me ! ' said he , ' all the world seems to have a design against my head this morning ' : and so saying , he threw himself sulkily into his easy chair ; but , oh dear ! the needle ran into him ; and this time the pain was not in his head . he now flew into a very great passion , and , suspecting the company who had come in the night before , he went to look after them , but they were all off ; so he swore that he never again would take in such a troop of vagabonds , who ate a great deal , paid no reckoning , and gave him nothing for his trouble but their apish tricks . 2 . how chanticleer and partlet went to visit mr korbes another day , chanticleer and partlet wished to ride out together ; so chanticleer built a handsome carriage with four red wheels , and harnessed six mice to it ; and then he and partlet got into the carriage , and away they drove . soon afterwards a cat met them , and said , ' where are you going ? ' and chanticleer replied , ' all on our way a visit to pay to mr korbes , the fox , today . ' then the cat said , ' take me with you , ' chanticleer said , ' with all my heart : get up behind , and be sure you do not fall off . ' ' take care of this handsome coach of mine , nor dirty my pretty red wheels so fine ! now , mice , be ready , and , wheels , run steady ! for we are going a visit to pay to mr korbes , the fox , today . ' soon after came up a millstone , an egg , a duck , and a pin ; and chanticleer gave them all leave to get into the carriage and go with them . when they arrived at mr korbes ' s house , he was not at home ; so the mice drew the carriage into the coach-house , chanticleer and partlet flew upon a beam , the cat sat down in the fireplace , the duck got into the washing cistern , the pin stuck himself into the bed pillow , the millstone laid himself over the house door , and the egg rolled himself up in the towel . when mr korbes came home , he went to the fireplace to make a fire ; but the cat threw all the ashes in his eyes : so he ran to the kitchen to wash himself ; but there the duck splashed all the water in his face ; and when he tried to wipe himself , the egg broke to pieces in the towel all over his face and eyes . then he was very angry , and went without his supper to bed ; but when he laid his head on the pillow , the pin ran into his cheek : at this he became quite furious , and , jumping up , would have run out of the house ; but when he came to the door , the millstone fell down on his head , and killed him on the spot . 3 . how partlet died and was buried , and how chanticleer died of grief another day chanticleer and partlet agreed to go again to the mountains to eat nuts ; and it was settled that all the nuts which they found should be shared equally between them . now partlet found a very large nut ; but she said nothing about it to chanticleer , and kept it all to herself : however , it was so big that she could not swallow it , and it stuck in her throat . then she was in a great fright , and cried out to chanticleer , ' pray run as fast as you can , and fetch me some water , or i shall be choked . ' chanticleer ran as fast as he could to the river , and said , ' river , give me some water , for partlet lies in the mountain , and will be choked by a great nut . ' the river said , ' run first to the bride , and ask her for a silken cord to draw up the water . ' chanticleer ran to the bride , and said , ' bride , you must give me a silken cord , for then the river will give me water , and the water i will carry to partlet , who lies on the mountain , and will be choked by a great nut . ' but the bride said , ' run first , and bring me my garland that is hanging on a willow in the garden . ' then chanticleer ran to the garden , and took the garland from the bough where it hung , and brought it to the bride ; and then the bride gave him the silken cord , and he took the silken cord to the river , and the river gave him water , and he carried the water to partlet ; but in the meantime she was choked by the great nut , and lay quite dead , and never moved any more . then chanticleer was very sorry , and cried bitterly ; and all the beasts came and wept with him over poor partlet . and six mice built a little hearse to carry her to her grave ; and when it was ready they harnessed themselves before it , and chanticleer drove them . on the way they met the fox . ' where are you going , chanticleer ? ' said he . ' to bury my partlet , ' said the other . ' may i go with you ? ' said the fox . ' yes ; but you must get up behind , or my horses will not be able to draw you . ' then the fox got up behind ; and presently the wolf , the bear , the goat , and all the beasts of the wood , came and climbed upon the hearse . so on they went till they came to a rapid stream . ' how shall we get over ? ' said chanticleer . then said a straw , ' i will lay myself across , and you may pass over upon me . ' but as the mice were going over , the straw slipped away and fell into the water , and the six mice all fell in and were drowned . what was to be done ? then a large log of wood came and said , ' i am big enough ; i will lay myself across the stream , and you shall pass over upon me . ' so he laid himself down ; but they managed so clumsily , that the log of wood fell in and was carried away by the stream . then a stone , who saw what had happened , came up and kindly offered to help poor chanticleer by laying himself across the stream ; and this time he got safely to the other side with the hearse , and managed to get partlet out of it ; but the fox and the other mourners , who were sitting behind , were too heavy , and fell back into the water and were all carried away by the stream and drowned . thus chanticleer was left alone with his dead partlet ; and having dug a grave for her , he laid her in it , and made a little hillock over her . then he sat down by the grave , and wept and mourned , till at last he died too ; and so all were dead .