there was once a man called frederick : he had a wife whose name was catherine , and they had not long been married . one day frederick said . ' kate ! i am going to work in the fields ; when i come back i shall be hungry so let me have something nice cooked , and a good draught of ale . ' ' very well , ' said she , ' it shall all be ready . ' when dinner-time drew nigh , catherine took a nice steak , which was all the meat she had , and put it on the fire to fry . the steak soon began to look brown , and to crackle in the pan ; and catherine stood by with a fork and turned it : then she said to herself , ' the steak is almost ready , i may as well go to the cellar for the ale . ' so she left the pan on the fire and took a large jug and went into the cellar and tapped the ale cask . the beer ran into the jug and catherine stood looking on . at last it popped into her head , ' the dog is not shut up--he may be running away with the steak ; that ' s well thought of . ' so up she ran from the cellar ; and sure enough the rascally cur had got the steak in his mouth , and was making off with it . away ran catherine , and away ran the dog across the field : but he ran faster than she , and stuck close to the steak . ' it ' s all gone , and " what can ' t be cured must be endured " , ' said catherine . so she turned round ; and as she had run a good way and was tired , she walked home leisurely to cool herself . now all this time the ale was running too , for catherine had not turned the cock ; and when the jug was full the liquor ran upon the floor till the cask was empty . when she got to the cellar stairs she saw what had happened . ' my stars ! ' said she , ' what shall i do to keep frederick from seeing all this slopping about ? ' so she thought a while ; and at last remembered that there was a sack of fine meal bought at the last fair , and that if she sprinkled this over the floor it would suck up the ale nicely . ' what a lucky thing , ' said she , ' that we kept that meal ! we have now a good use for it . ' so away she went for it : but she managed to set it down just upon the great jug full of beer , and upset it ; and thus all the ale that had been saved was set swimming on the floor also . ' ah ! well , ' said she , ' when one goes another may as well follow . ' then she strewed the meal all about the cellar , and was quite pleased with her cleverness , and said , ' how very neat and clean it looks ! ' at noon frederick came home . ' now , wife , ' cried he , ' what have you for dinner ? ' ' o frederick ! ' answered she , ' i was cooking you a steak ; but while i went down to draw the ale , the dog ran away with it ; and while i ran after him , the ale ran out ; and when i went to dry up the ale with the sack of meal that we got at the fair , i upset the jug : but the cellar is now quite dry , and looks so clean ! ' ' kate , kate , ' said he , ' how could you do all this ? ' why did you leave the steak to fry , and the ale to run , and then spoil all the meal ? ' ' why , frederick , ' said she , ' i did not know i was doing wrong ; you should have told me before . ' the husband thought to himself , ' if my wife manages matters thus , i must look sharp myself . ' now he had a good deal of gold in the house : so he said to catherine , ' what pretty yellow buttons these are ! i shall put them into a box and bury them in the garden ; but take care that you never go near or meddle with them . ' ' no , frederick , ' said she , ' that i never will . ' as soon as he was gone , there came by some pedlars with earthenware plates and dishes , and they asked her whether she would buy . ' oh dear me , i should like to buy very much , but i have no money : if you had any use for yellow buttons , i might deal with you . ' ' yellow buttons ! ' said they : ' let us have a look at them . ' ' go into the garden and dig where i tell you , and you will find the yellow buttons : i dare not go myself . ' so the rogues went : and when they found what these yellow buttons were , they took them all away , and left her plenty of plates and dishes . then she set them all about the house for a show : and when frederick came back , he cried out , ' kate , what have you been doing ? ' ' see , ' said she , ' i have bought all these with your yellow buttons : but i did not touch them myself ; the pedlars went themselves and dug them up . ' ' wife , wife , ' said frederick , ' what a pretty piece of work you have made ! those yellow buttons were all my money : how came you to do such a thing ? ' ' why , ' answered she , ' i did not know there was any harm in it ; you should have told me . ' catherine stood musing for a while , and at last said to her husband , ' hark ye , frederick , we will soon get the gold back : let us run after the thieves . ' ' well , we will try , ' answered he ; ' but take some butter and cheese with you , that we may have something to eat by the way . ' ' very well , ' said she ; and they set out : and as frederick walked the fastest , he left his wife some way behind . ' it does not matter , ' thought she : ' when we turn back , i shall be so much nearer home than he . ' presently she came to the top of a hill , down the side of which there was a road so narrow that the cart wheels always chafed the trees on each side as they passed . ' ah , see now , ' said she , ' how they have bruised and wounded those poor trees ; they will never get well . ' so she took pity on them , and made use of the butter to grease them all , so that the wheels might not hurt them so much . while she was doing this kind office one of her cheeses fell out of the basket , and rolled down the hill . catherine looked , but could not see where it had gone ; so she said , ' well , i suppose the other will go the same way and find you ; he has younger legs than i have . ' then she rolled the other cheese after it ; and away it went , nobody knows where , down the hill . but she said she supposed that they knew the road , and would follow her , and she could not stay there all day waiting for them . at last she overtook frederick , who desired her to give him something to eat . then she gave him the dry bread . ' where are the butter and cheese ? ' said he . ' oh ! ' answered she , ' i used the butter to grease those poor trees that the wheels chafed so : and one of the cheeses ran away so i sent the other after it to find it , and i suppose they are both on the road together somewhere . ' ' what a goose you are to do such silly things ! ' said the husband . ' how can you say so ? ' said she ; ' i am sure you never told me not . ' they ate the dry bread together ; and frederick said , ' kate , i hope you locked the door safe when you came away . ' ' no , ' answered she , ' you did not tell me . ' ' then go home , and do it now before we go any farther , ' said frederick , ' and bring with you something to eat . ' catherine did as he told her , and thought to herself by the way , ' frederick wants something to eat ; but i don ' t think he is very fond of butter and cheese : i ' ll bring him a bag of fine nuts , and the vinegar , for i have often seen him take some . ' when she reached home , she bolted the back door , but the front door she took off the hinges , and said , ' frederick told me to lock the door , but surely it can nowhere be so safe if i take it with me . ' so she took her time by the way ; and when she overtook her husband she cried out , ' there , frederick , there is the door itself , you may watch it as carefully as you please . ' ' alas ! alas ! ' said he , ' what a clever wife i have ! i sent you to make the house fast , and you take the door away , so that everybody may go in and out as they please--however , as you have brought the door , you shall carry it about with you for your pains . ' ' very well , ' answered she , ' i ' ll carry the door ; but i ' ll not carry the nuts and vinegar bottle also--that would be too much of a load ; so if you please , i ' ll fasten them to the door . ' frederick of course made no objection to that plan , and they set off into the wood to look for the thieves ; but they could not find them : and when it grew dark , they climbed up into a tree to spend the night there . scarcely were they up , than who should come by but the very rogues they were looking for . they were in truth great rascals , and belonged to that class of people who find things before they are lost ; they were tired ; so they sat down and made a fire under the very tree where frederick and catherine were . frederick slipped down on the other side , and picked up some stones . then he climbed up again , and tried to hit the thieves on the head with them : but they only said , ' it must be near morning , for the wind shakes the fir-apples down . ' catherine , who had the door on her shoulder , began to be very tired ; but she thought it was the nuts upon it that were so heavy : so she said softly , ' frederick , i must let the nuts go . ' ' no , ' answered he , ' not now , they will discover us . ' ' i can ' t help that : they must go . ' ' well , then , make haste and throw them down , if you will . ' then away rattled the nuts down among the boughs and one of the thieves cried , ' bless me , it is hailing . ' a little while after , catherine thought the door was still very heavy : so she whispered to frederick , ' i must throw the vinegar down . ' ' pray don ' t , ' answered he , ' it will discover us . ' ' i can ' t help that , ' said she , ' go it must . ' so she poured all the vinegar down ; and the thieves said , ' what a heavy dew there is ! ' at last it popped into catherine ' s head that it was the door itself that was so heavy all the time : so she whispered , ' frederick , i must throw the door down soon . ' but he begged and prayed her not to do so , for he was sure it would betray them . ' here goes , however , ' said she : and down went the door with such a clatter upon the thieves , that they cried out ' murder ! ' and not knowing what was coming , ran away as fast as they could , and left all the gold . so when frederick and catherine came down , there they found all their money safe and sound .