there was once a queen who had a little daughter , still too young to run alone . one day the child was very troublesome , and the mother could not quiet it , do what she would . she grew impatient , and seeing the ravens flying round the castle , she opened the window , and said : ' i wish you were a raven and would fly away , then i should have a little peace . ' scarcely were the words out of her mouth , when the child in her arms was turned into a raven , and flew away from her through the open window . the bird took its flight to a dark wood and remained there for a long time , and meanwhile the parents could hear nothing of their child . long after this , a man was making his way through the wood when he heard a raven calling , and he followed the sound of the voice . as he drew near , the raven said , ' i am by birth a king ' s daughter , but am now under the spell of some enchantment ; you can , however , set me free . ' ' what am i to do ? ' he asked . she replied , ' go farther into the wood until you come to a house , wherein lives an old woman ; she will offer you food and drink , but you must not take of either ; if you do , you will fall into a deep sleep , and will not be able to help me . in the garden behind the house is a large tan-heap , and on that you must stand and watch for me . i shall drive there in my carriage at two o ' clock in the afternoon for three successive days ; the first day it will be drawn by four white , the second by four chestnut , and the last by four black horses ; but if you fail to keep awake and i find you sleeping , i shall not be set free . ' the man promised to do all that she wished , but the raven said , ' alas ! i know even now that you will take something from the woman and be unable to save me . ' the man assured her again that he would on no account touch a thing to eat or drink . when he came to the house and went inside , the old woman met him , and said , ' poor man ! how tired you are ! come in and rest and let me give you something to eat and drink . ' ' no , ' answered the man , ' i will neither eat not drink . ' but she would not leave him alone , and urged him saying , ' if you will not eat anything , at least you might take a draught of wine ; one drink counts for nothing , ' and at last he allowed himself to be persuaded , and drank . as it drew towards the appointed hour , he went outside into the garden and mounted the tan-heap to await the raven . suddenly a feeling of fatigue came over him , and unable to resist it , he lay down for a little while , fully determined , however , to keep awake ; but in another minute his eyes closed of their own accord , and he fell into such a deep sleep , that all the noises in the world would not have awakened him . at two o ' clock the raven came driving along , drawn by her four white horses ; but even before she reached the spot , she said to herself , sighing , ' i know he has fallen asleep . ' when she entered the garden , there she found him as she had feared , lying on the tan-heap , fast asleep . she got out of her carriage and went to him ; she called him and shook him , but it was all in vain , he still continued sleeping . the next day at noon , the old woman came to him again with food and drink which he at first refused . at last , overcome by her persistent entreaties that he would take something , he lifted the glass and drank again . towards two o ' clock he went into the garden and on to the tan-heap to watch for the raven . he had not been there long before he began to feel so tired that his limbs seemed hardly able to support him , and he could not stand upright any longer ; so again he lay down and fell fast asleep . as the raven drove along her four chestnut horses , she said sorrowfully to herself , ' i know he has fallen asleep . ' she went as before to look for him , but he slept , and it was impossible to awaken him . the following day the old woman said to him , ' what is this ? you are not eating or drinking anything , do you want to kill yourself ? ' he answered , ' i may not and will not either eat or drink . ' but she put down the dish of food and the glass of wine in front of him , and when he smelt the wine , he was unable to resist the temptation , and took a deep draught . when the hour came round again he went as usual on to the tan-heap in the garden to await the king ' s daughter , but he felt even more overcome with weariness than on the two previous days , and throwing himself down , he slept like a log . at two o ' clock the raven could be seen approaching , and this time her coachman and everything about her , as well as her horses , were black . she was sadder than ever as she drove along , and said mournfully , ' i know he has fallen asleep , and will not be able to set me free . ' she found him sleeping heavily , and all her efforts to awaken him were of no avail . then she placed beside him a loaf , and some meat , and a flask of wine , of such a kind , that however much he took of them , they would never grow less . after that she drew a gold ring , on which her name was engraved , off her finger , and put it upon one of his . finally , she laid a letter near him , in which , after giving him particulars of the food and drink she had left for him , she finished with the following words : ' i see that as long as you remain here you will never be able to set me free ; if , however , you still wish to do so , come to the golden castle of stromberg ; this is well within your power to accomplish . ' she then returned to her carriage and drove to the golden castle of stromberg . when the man awoke and found that he had been sleeping , he was grieved at heart , and said , ' she has no doubt been here and driven away again , and it is now too late for me to save her . ' then his eyes fell on the things which were lying beside him ; he read the letter , and knew from it all that had happened . he rose up without delay , eager to start on his way and to reach the castle of stromberg , but he had no idea in which direction he ought to go . he travelled about a long time in search of it and came at last to a dark forest , through which he went on walking for fourteen days and still could not find a way out . once more the night came on , and worn out he lay down under a bush and fell asleep . again the next day he pursued his way through the forest , and that evening , thinking to rest again , he lay down as before , but he heard such a howling and wailing that he found it impossible to sleep . he waited till it was darker and people had begun to light up their houses , and then seeing a little glimmer ahead of him , he went towards it . he found that the light came from a house which looked smaller than it really was , from the contrast of its height with that of an immense giant who stood in front of it . he thought to himself , ' if the giant sees me going in , my life will not be worth much . ' however , after a while he summoned up courage and went forward . when the giant saw him , he called out , ' it is lucky for that you have come , for i have not had anything to eat for a long time . i can have you now for my supper . ' ' i would rather you let that alone , ' said the man , ' for i do not willingly give myself up to be eaten ; if you are wanting food i have enough to satisfy your hunger . ' ' if that is so , ' replied the giant , ' i will leave you in peace ; i only thought of eating you because i had nothing else . ' so they went indoors together and sat down , and the man brought out the bread , meat , and wine , which although he had eaten and drunk of them , were still unconsumed . the giant was pleased with the good cheer , and ate and drank to his heart ' s content . when he had finished his supper the man asked him if he could direct him to the castle of stromberg . the giant said , ' i will look on my map ; on it are marked all the towns , villages , and houses . ' so he fetched his map , and looked for the castle , but could not find it . ' never mind , ' he said , ' i have larger maps upstairs in the cupboard , we will look on those , ' but they searched in vain , for the castle was not marked even on these . the man now thought he should like to continue his journey , but the giant begged him to remain for a day or two longer until the return of his brother , who was away in search of provisions . when the brother came home , they asked him about the castle of stromberg , and he told them he would look on his own maps as soon as he had eaten and appeased his hunger . accordingly , when he had finished his supper , they all went up together to his room and looked through his maps , but the castle was not to be found . then he fetched other older maps , and they went on looking for the castle until at last they found it , but it was many thousand miles away . ' how shall i be able to get there ? ' asked the man . ' i have two hours to spare , ' said the giant , ' and i will carry you into the neighbourhood of the castle ; i must then return to look after the child who is in our care . ' the giant , thereupon , carried the man to within about a hundred leagues of the castle , where he left him , saying , ' you will be able to walk the remainder of the way yourself . ' the man journeyed on day and night till he reached the golden castle of stromberg . he found it situated , however , on a glass mountain , and looking up from the foot he saw the enchanted maiden drive round her castle and then go inside . he was overjoyed to see her , and longed to get to the top of the mountain , but the sides were so slippery that every time he attempted to climb he fell back again . when he saw that it was impossible to reach her , he was greatly grieved , and said to himself , ' i will remain here and wait for her , ' so he built himself a little hut , and there he sat and watched for a whole year , and every day he saw the king ' s daughter driving round her castle , but still was unable to get nearer to her . looking out from his hut one day he saw three robbers fighting and he called out to them , ' god be with you . ' they stopped when they heard the call , but looking round and seeing nobody , they went on again with their fighting , which now became more furious . ' god be with you , ' he cried again , and again they paused and looked about , but seeing no one went back to their fighting . a third time he called out , ' god be with you , ' and then thinking he should like to know the cause of dispute between the three men , he went out and asked them why they were fighting so angrily with one another . one of them said that he had found a stick , and that he had but to strike it against any door through which he wished to pass , and it immediately flew open . another told him that he had found a cloak which rendered its wearer invisible ; and the third had caught a horse which would carry its rider over any obstacle , and even up the glass mountain . they had been unable to decide whether they would keep together and have the things in common , or whether they would separate . on hearing this , the man said , ' i will give you something in exchange for those three things ; not money , for that i have not got , but something that is of far more value . i must first , however , prove whether all you have told me about your three things is true . ' the robbers , therefore , made him get on the horse , and handed him the stick and the cloak , and when he had put this round him he was no longer visible . then he fell upon them with the stick and beat them one after another , crying , ' there , you idle vagabonds , you have got what you deserve ; are you satisfied now ! ' after this he rode up the glass mountain . when he reached the gate of the castle , he found it closed , but he gave it a blow with his stick , and it flew wide open at once and he passed through . he mounted the steps and entered the room where the maiden was sitting , with a golden goblet full of wine in front of her . she could not see him for he still wore his cloak . he took the ring which she had given him off his finger , and threw it into the goblet , so that it rang as it touched the bottom . ' that is my own ring , ' she exclaimed , ' and if that is so the man must also be here who is coming to set me free . ' she sought for him about the castle , but could find him nowhere . meanwhile he had gone outside again and mounted his horse and thrown off the cloak . when therefore she came to the castle gate she saw him , and cried aloud for joy . then he dismounted and took her in his arms ; and she kissed him , and said , ' now you have indeed set me free , and tomorrow we will celebrate our marriage . '