the wife of a rich man fell sick ; and when she felt that her end drew nigh , she called her only daughter to her bed-side , and said , ' always be a good girl , and i will look down from heaven and watch over you . ' soon afterwards she shut her eyes and died , and was buried in the garden ; and the little girl went every day to her grave and wept , and was always good and kind to all about her . and the snow fell and spread a beautiful white covering over the grave ; but by the time the spring came , and the sun had melted it away again , her father had married another wife . this new wife had two daughters of her own , that she brought home with her ; they were fair in face but foul at heart , and it was now a sorry time for the poor little girl . ' what does the good-for-nothing want in the parlour ? ' said they ; ' they who would eat bread should first earn it ; away with the kitchen-maid ! ' then they took away her fine clothes , and gave her an old grey frock to put on , and laughed at her , and turned her into the kitchen . there she was forced to do hard work ; to rise early before daylight , to bring the water , to make the fire , to cook and to wash . besides that , the sisters plagued her in all sorts of ways , and laughed at her . in the evening when she was tired , she had no bed to lie down on , but was made to lie by the hearth among the ashes ; and as this , of course , made her always dusty and dirty , they called her ashputtel . it happened once that the father was going to the fair , and asked his wife ' s daughters what he should bring them . ' fine clothes , ' said the first ; ' pearls and diamonds , ' cried the second . ' now , child , ' said he to his own daughter , ' what will you have ? ' ' the first twig , dear father , that brushes against your hat when you turn your face to come homewards , ' said she . then he bought for the first two the fine clothes and pearls and diamonds they had asked for : and on his way home , as he rode through a green copse , a hazel twig brushed against him , and almost pushed off his hat : so he broke it off and brought it away ; and when he got home he gave it to his daughter . then she took it , and went to her mother ' s grave and planted it there ; and cried so much that it was watered with her tears ; and there it grew and became a fine tree . three times every day she went to it and cried ; and soon a little bird came and built its nest upon the tree , and talked with her , and watched over her , and brought her whatever she wished for . now it happened that the king of that land held a feast , which was to last three days ; and out of those who came to it his son was to choose a bride for himself . ashputtel ' s two sisters were asked to come ; so they called her up , and said , ' now , comb our hair , brush our shoes , and tie our sashes for us , for we are going to dance at the king ' s feast . ' then she did as she was told ; but when all was done she could not help crying , for she thought to herself , she should so have liked to have gone with them to the ball ; and at last she begged her mother very hard to let her go . ' you , ashputtel ! ' said she ; ' you who have nothing to wear , no clothes at all , and who cannot even dance--you want to go to the ball ? and when she kept on begging , she said at last , to get rid of her , ' i will throw this dishful of peas into the ash-heap , and if in two hours ' time you have picked them all out , you shall go to the feast too . ' then she threw the peas down among the ashes , but the little maiden ran out at the back door into the garden , and cried out : ' hither , hither , through the sky , turtle-doves and linnets , fly ! blackbird , thrush , and chaffinch gay , hither , hither , haste away ! one and all come help me , quick ! haste ye , haste ye ! --pick , pick , pick ! ' then first came two white doves , flying in at the kitchen window ; next came two turtle-doves ; and after them came all the little birds under heaven , chirping and fluttering in : and they flew down into the ashes . and the little doves stooped their heads down and set to work , pick , pick , pick ; and then the others began to pick , pick , pick : and among them all they soon picked out all the good grain , and put it into a dish but left the ashes . long before the end of the hour the work was quite done , and all flew out again at the windows . then ashputtel brought the dish to her mother , overjoyed at the thought that now she should go to the ball . but the mother said , ' no , no ! you slut , you have no clothes , and cannot dance ; you shall not go . ' and when ashputtel begged very hard to go , she said , ' if you can in one hour ' s time pick two of those dishes of peas out of the ashes , you shall go too . ' and thus she thought she should at least get rid of her . so she shook two dishes of peas into the ashes . but the little maiden went out into the garden at the back of the house , and cried out as before : ' hither , hither , through the sky , turtle-doves and linnets , fly ! blackbird , thrush , and chaffinch gay , hither , hither , haste away ! one and all come help me , quick ! haste ye , haste ye ! --pick , pick , pick ! ' then first came two white doves in at the kitchen window ; next came two turtle-doves ; and after them came all the little birds under heaven , chirping and hopping about . and they flew down into the ashes ; and the little doves put their heads down and set to work , pick , pick , pick ; and then the others began pick , pick , pick ; and they put all the good grain into the dishes , and left all the ashes . before half an hour ' s time all was done , and out they flew again . and then ashputtel took the dishes to her mother , rejoicing to think that she should now go to the ball . but her mother said , ' it is all of no use , you cannot go ; you have no clothes , and cannot dance , and you would only put us to shame ' : and off she went with her two daughters to the ball . now when all were gone , and nobody left at home , ashputtel went sorrowfully and sat down under the hazel-tree , and cried out : ' shake , shake , hazel-tree , gold and silver over me ! ' then her friend the bird flew out of the tree , and brought a gold and silver dress for her , and slippers of spangled silk ; and she put them on , and followed her sisters to the feast . but they did not know her , and thought it must be some strange princess , she looked so fine and beautiful in her rich clothes ; and they never once thought of ashputtel , taking it for granted that she was safe at home in the dirt . the king ' s son soon came up to her , and took her by the hand and danced with her , and no one else : and he never left her hand ; but when anyone else came to ask her to dance , he said , ' this lady is dancing with me . ' thus they danced till a late hour of the night ; and then she wanted to go home : and the king ' s son said , ' i shall go and take care of you to your home ' ; for he wanted to see where the beautiful maiden lived . but she slipped away from him , unawares , and ran off towards home ; and as the prince followed her , she jumped up into the pigeon-house and shut the door . then he waited till her father came home , and told him that the unknown maiden , who had been at the feast , had hid herself in the pigeon-house . but when they had broken open the door they found no one within ; and as they came back into the house , ashputtel was lying , as she always did , in her dirty frock by the ashes , and her dim little lamp was burning in the chimney . for she had run as quickly as she could through the pigeon-house and on to the hazel-tree , and had there taken off her beautiful clothes , and put them beneath the tree , that the bird might carry them away , and had lain down again amid the ashes in her little grey frock . the next day when the feast was again held , and her father , mother , and sisters were gone , ashputtel went to the hazel-tree , and said : ' shake , shake , hazel-tree , gold and silver over me ! ' and the bird came and brought a still finer dress than the one she had worn the day before . and when she came in it to the ball , everyone wondered at her beauty : but the king ' s son , who was waiting for her , took her by the hand , and danced with her ; and when anyone asked her to dance , he said as before , ' this lady is dancing with me . ' when night came she wanted to go home ; and the king ' s son followed here as before , that he might see into what house she went : but she sprang away from him all at once into the garden behind her father ' s house . in this garden stood a fine large pear-tree full of ripe fruit ; and ashputtel , not knowing where to hide herself , jumped up into it without being seen . then the king ' s son lost sight of her , and could not find out where she was gone , but waited till her father came home , and said to him , ' the unknown lady who danced with me has slipped away , and i think she must have sprung into the pear-tree . ' the father thought to himself , ' can it be ashputtel ? ' so he had an axe brought ; and they cut down the tree , but found no one upon it . and when they came back into the kitchen , there lay ashputtel among the ashes ; for she had slipped down on the other side of the tree , and carried her beautiful clothes back to the bird at the hazel-tree , and then put on her little grey frock . the third day , when her father and mother and sisters were gone , she went again into the garden , and said : ' shake , shake , hazel-tree , gold and silver over me ! ' then her kind friend the bird brought a dress still finer than the former one , and slippers which were all of gold : so that when she came to the feast no one knew what to say , for wonder at her beauty : and the king ' s son danced with nobody but her ; and when anyone else asked her to dance , he said , ' this lady is _my_ partner , sir . ' when night came she wanted to go home ; and the king ' s son would go with her , and said to himself , ' i will not lose her this time ' ; but , however , she again slipped away from him , though in such a hurry that she dropped her left golden slipper upon the stairs . the prince took the shoe , and went the next day to the king his father , and said , ' i will take for my wife the lady that this golden slipper fits . ' then both the sisters were overjoyed to hear it ; for they had beautiful feet , and had no doubt that they could wear the golden slipper . the eldest went first into the room where the slipper was , and wanted to try it on , and the mother stood by . but her great toe could not go into it , and the shoe was altogether much too small for her . then the mother gave her a knife , and said , ' never mind , cut it off ; when you are queen you will not care about toes ; you will not want to walk . ' so the silly girl cut off her great toe , and thus squeezed on the shoe , and went to the king ' s son . then he took her for his bride , and set her beside him on his horse , and rode away with her homewards . but on their way home they had to pass by the hazel-tree that ashputtel had planted ; and on the branch sat a little dove singing : ' back again ! back again ! look to the shoe ! the shoe is too small , and not made for you ! prince ! prince ! look again for thy bride , for she ' s not the true one that sits by thy side . ' then the prince got down and looked at her foot ; and he saw , by the blood that streamed from it , what a trick she had played him . so he turned his horse round , and brought the false bride back to her home , and said , ' this is not the right bride ; let the other sister try and put on the slipper . ' then she went into the room and got her foot into the shoe , all but the heel , which was too large . but her mother squeezed it in till the blood came , and took her to the king ' s son : and he set her as his bride by his side on his horse , and rode away with her . but when they came to the hazel-tree the little dove sat there still , and sang : ' back again ! back again ! look to the shoe ! the shoe is too small , and not made for you ! prince ! prince ! look again for thy bride , for she ' s not the true one that sits by thy side . ' then he looked down , and saw that the blood streamed so much from the shoe , that her white stockings were quite red . so he turned his horse and brought her also back again . ' this is not the true bride , ' said he to the father ; ' have you no other daughters ? ' ' no , ' said he ; ' there is only a little dirty ashputtel here , the child of my first wife ; i am sure she cannot be the bride . ' the prince told him to send her . but the mother said , ' no , no , she is much too dirty ; she will not dare to show herself . ' however , the prince would have her come ; and she first washed her face and hands , and then went in and curtsied to him , and he reached her the golden slipper . then she took her clumsy shoe off her left foot , and put on the golden slipper ; and it fitted her as if it had been made for her . and when he drew near and looked at her face he knew her , and said , ' this is the right bride . ' but the mother and both the sisters were frightened , and turned pale with anger as he took ashputtel on his horse , and rode away with her . and when they came to the hazel-tree , the white dove sang : ' home ! home ! look at the shoe ! princess ! the shoe was made for you ! prince ! prince ! take home thy bride , for she is the true one that sits by thy side ! ' and when the dove had done its song , it came flying , and perched upon her right shoulder , and so went home with her .