there was once upon a time an old fox with nine tails , who believed that his wife was not faithful to him , and wished to put her to the test . he stretched himself out under the bench , did not move a limb , and behaved as if he were stone dead . mrs fox went up to her room , shut herself in , and her maid , miss cat , sat by the fire , and did the cooking . when it became known that the old fox was dead , suitors presented themselves . the maid heard someone standing at the house-door , knocking . she went and opened it , and it was a young fox , who said : ' what may you be about , miss cat ? do you sleep or do you wake ? ' she answered : ' i am not sleeping , i am waking , would you know what i am making ? i am boiling warm beer with butter , will you be my guest for supper ? ' ' no , thank you , miss , ' said the fox , ' what is mrs fox doing ? ' the maid replied : ' she is sitting in her room , moaning in her gloom , weeping her little eyes quite red , because old mr fox is dead . ' ' do just tell her , miss , that a young fox is here , who would like to woo her . ' ' certainly , young sir . ' the cat goes up the stairs trip , trap , the door she knocks at tap , tap , tap , ' mistress fox , are you inside ? ' ' oh , yes , my little cat , ' she cried . ' a wooer he stands at the door out there . ' ' what does he look like , my dear ? ' ' has he nine as beautiful tails as the late mr fox ? ' ' oh , no , ' answered the cat , ' he has only one . ' ' then i will not have him . ' miss cat went downstairs and sent the wooer away . soon afterwards there was another knock , and another fox was at the door who wished to woo mrs fox . he had two tails , but he did not fare better than the first . after this still more came , each with one tail more than the other , but they were all turned away , until at last one came who had nine tails , like old mr fox . when the widow heard that , she said joyfully to the cat : ' now open the gates and doors all wide , and carry old mr fox outside . ' but just as the wedding was going to be solemnized , old mr fox stirred under the bench , and cudgelled all the rabble , and drove them and mrs fox out of the house .