there was once a fisherman who lived with his wife in a pigsty , close by the seaside . the fisherman used to go out all day long a-fishing ; and one day , as he sat on the shore with his rod , looking at the sparkling waves and watching his line , all on a sudden his float was dragged away deep into the water : and in drawing it up he pulled out a great fish . but the fish said , ' pray let me live ! i am not a real fish ; i am an enchanted prince : put me in the water again , and let me go ! ' ' oh , ho ! ' said the man , ' you need not make so many words about the matter ; i will have nothing to do with a fish that can talk : so swim away , sir , as soon as you please ! ' then he put him back into the water , and the fish darted straight down to the bottom , and left a long streak of blood behind him on the wave . when the fisherman went home to his wife in the pigsty , he told her how he had caught a great fish , and how it had told him it was an enchanted prince , and how , on hearing it speak , he had let it go again . ' did not you ask it for anything ? ' said the wife , ' we live very wretchedly here , in this nasty dirty pigsty ; do go back and tell the fish we want a snug little cottage . ' the fisherman did not much like the business : however , he went to the seashore ; and when he came back there the water looked all yellow and green . and he stood at the water ' s edge , and said : ' o man of the sea ! hearken to me ! my wife ilsabill will have her own will , and hath sent me to beg a boon of thee ! ' then the fish came swimming to him , and said , ' well , what is her will ? what does your wife want ? ' ' ah ! ' said the fisherman , ' she says that when i had caught you , i ought to have asked you for something before i let you go ; she does not like living any longer in the pigsty , and wants a snug little cottage . ' ' go home , then , ' said the fish ; ' she is in the cottage already ! ' so the man went home , and saw his wife standing at the door of a nice trim little cottage . ' come in , come in ! ' said she ; ' is not this much better than the filthy pigsty we had ? ' and there was a parlour , and a bedchamber , and a kitchen ; and behind the cottage there was a little garden , planted with all sorts of flowers and fruits ; and there was a courtyard behind , full of ducks and chickens . ' ah ! ' said the fisherman , ' how happily we shall live now ! ' ' we will try to do so , at least , ' said his wife . everything went right for a week or two , and then dame ilsabill said , ' husband , there is not near room enough for us in this cottage ; the courtyard and the garden are a great deal too small ; i should like to have a large stone castle to live in : go to the fish again and tell him to give us a castle . ' ' wife , ' said the fisherman , ' i don ' t like to go to him again , for perhaps he will be angry ; we ought to be easy with this pretty cottage to live in . ' ' nonsense ! ' said the wife ; ' he will do it very willingly , i know ; go along and try ! ' the fisherman went , but his heart was very heavy : and when he came to the sea , it looked blue and gloomy , though it was very calm ; and he went close to the edge of the waves , and said : ' o man of the sea ! hearken to me ! my wife ilsabill will have her own will , and hath sent me to beg a boon of thee ! ' ' well , what does she want now ? ' said the fish . ' ah ! ' said the man , dolefully , ' my wife wants to live in a stone castle . ' ' go home , then , ' said the fish ; ' she is standing at the gate of it already . ' so away went the fisherman , and found his wife standing before the gate of a great castle . ' see , ' said she , ' is not this grand ? ' with that they went into the castle together , and found a great many servants there , and the rooms all richly furnished , and full of golden chairs and tables ; and behind the castle was a garden , and around it was a park half a mile long , full of sheep , and goats , and hares , and deer ; and in the courtyard were stables and cow-houses . ' well , ' said the man , ' now we will live cheerful and happy in this beautiful castle for the rest of our lives . ' ' perhaps we may , ' said the wife ; ' but let us sleep upon it , before we make up our minds to that . ' so they went to bed . the next morning when dame ilsabill awoke it was broad daylight , and she jogged the fisherman with her elbow , and said , ' get up , husband , and bestir yourself , for we must be king of all the land . ' ' wife , wife , ' said the man , ' why should we wish to be the king ? i will not be king . ' ' then i will , ' said she . ' but , wife , ' said the fisherman , ' how can you be king--the fish cannot make you a king ? ' ' husband , ' said she , ' say no more about it , but go and try ! i will be king . ' so the man went away quite sorrowful to think that his wife should want to be king . this time the sea looked a dark grey colour , and was overspread with curling waves and the ridges of foam as he cried out : ' o man of the sea ! hearken to me ! my wife ilsabill will have her own will , and hath sent me to beg a boon of thee ! ' ' well , what would she have now ? ' said the fish . ' alas ! ' said the poor man , ' my wife wants to be king . ' ' go home , ' said the fish ; ' she is king already . ' then the fisherman went home ; and as he came close to the palace he saw a troop of soldiers , and heard the sound of drums and trumpets . and when he went in he saw his wife sitting on a throne of gold and diamonds , with a golden crown upon her head ; and on each side of her stood six fair maidens , each a head taller than the other . ' well , wife , ' said the fisherman , ' are you king ? ' ' yes , ' said she , ' i am king . ' and when he had looked at her for a long time , he said , ' ah , wife ! what a fine thing it is to be king ! now we shall never have anything more to wish for as long as we live . ' ' i don ' t know how that may be , ' said she ; ' never is a long time . i am king , it is true ; but i begin to be tired of that , and i think i should like to be emperor . ' ' alas , wife ! why should you wish to be emperor ? ' said the fisherman . ' husband , ' said she , ' go to the fish ! i say i will be emperor . ' ' ah , wife ! ' replied the fisherman , ' the fish cannot make an emperor , i am sure , and i should not like to ask him for such a thing . ' ' i am king , ' said ilsabill , ' and you are my slave ; so go at once ! ' so the fisherman was forced to go ; and he muttered as he went along , ' this will come to no good , it is too much to ask ; the fish will be tired at last , and then we shall be sorry for what we have done . ' he soon came to the seashore ; and the water was quite black and muddy , and a mighty whirlwind blew over the waves and rolled them about , but he went as near as he could to the water ' s brink , and said : ' o man of the sea ! hearken to me ! my wife ilsabill will have her own will , and hath sent me to beg a boon of thee ! ' ' what would she have now ? ' said the fish . ' ah ! ' said the fisherman , ' she wants to be emperor . ' ' go home , ' said the fish ; ' she is emperor already . ' so he went home again ; and as he came near he saw his wife ilsabill sitting on a very lofty throne made of solid gold , with a great crown on her head full two yards high ; and on each side of her stood her guards and attendants in a row , each one smaller than the other , from the tallest giant down to a little dwarf no bigger than my finger . and before her stood princes , and dukes , and earls : and the fisherman went up to her and said , ' wife , are you emperor ? ' ' yes , ' said she , ' i am emperor . ' ' ah ! ' said the man , as he gazed upon her , ' what a fine thing it is to be emperor ! ' ' husband , ' said she , ' why should we stop at being emperor ? i will be pope next . ' ' o wife , wife ! ' said he , ' how can you be pope ? there is but one pope at a time in christendom . ' ' husband , ' said she , ' i will be pope this very day . ' ' but , ' replied the husband , ' the fish cannot make you pope . ' ' what nonsense ! ' said she ; ' if he can make an emperor , he can make a pope : go and try him . ' so the fisherman went . but when he came to the shore the wind was raging and the sea was tossed up and down in boiling waves , and the ships were in trouble , and rolled fearfully upon the tops of the billows . in the middle of the heavens there was a little piece of blue sky , but towards the south all was red , as if a dreadful storm was rising . at this sight the fisherman was dreadfully frightened , and he trembled so that his knees knocked together : but still he went down near to the shore , and said : ' o man of the sea ! hearken to me ! my wife ilsabill will have her own will , and hath sent me to beg a boon of thee ! ' ' what does she want now ? ' said the fish . ' ah ! ' said the fisherman , ' my wife wants to be pope . ' ' go home , ' said the fish ; ' she is pope already . ' then the fisherman went home , and found ilsabill sitting on a throne that was two miles high . and she had three great crowns on her head , and around her stood all the pomp and power of the church . and on each side of her were two rows of burning lights , of all sizes , the greatest as large as the highest and biggest tower in the world , and the least no larger than a small rushlight . ' wife , ' said the fisherman , as he looked at all this greatness , ' are you pope ? ' ' yes , ' said she , ' i am pope . ' ' well , wife , ' replied he , ' it is a grand thing to be pope ; and now you must be easy , for you can be nothing greater . ' ' i will think about that , ' said the wife . then they went to bed : but dame ilsabill could not sleep all night for thinking what she should be next . at last , as she was dropping asleep , morning broke , and the sun rose . ' ha ! ' thought she , as she woke up and looked at it through the window , ' after all i cannot prevent the sun rising . ' at this thought she was very angry , and wakened her husband , and said , ' husband , go to the fish and tell him i must be lord of the sun and moon . ' the fisherman was half asleep , but the thought frightened him so much that he started and fell out of bed . ' alas , wife ! ' said he , ' cannot you be easy with being pope ? ' ' no , ' said she , ' i am very uneasy as long as the sun and moon rise without my leave . go to the fish at once ! ' then the man went shivering with fear ; and as he was going down to the shore a dreadful storm arose , so that the trees and the very rocks shook . and all the heavens became black with stormy clouds , and the lightnings played , and the thunders rolled ; and you might have seen in the sea great black waves , swelling up like mountains with crowns of white foam upon their heads . and the fisherman crept towards the sea , and cried out , as well as he could : ' o man of the sea ! hearken to me ! my wife ilsabill will have her own will , and hath sent me to beg a boon of thee ! ' ' what does she want now ? ' said the fish . ' ah ! ' said he , ' she wants to be lord of the sun and moon . ' ' go home , ' said the fish , ' to your pigsty again . ' and there they live to this very day .