there was once a man who had seven sons , and last of all one daughter . although the little girl was very pretty , she was so weak and small that they thought she could not live ; but they said she should at once be christened . so the father sent one of his sons in haste to the spring to get some water , but the other six ran with him . each wanted to be first at drawing the water , and so they were in such a hurry that all let their pitchers fall into the well , and they stood very foolishly looking at one another , and did not know what to do , for none dared go home . in the meantime the father was uneasy , and could not tell what made the young men stay so long . ' surely , ' said he , ' the whole seven must have forgotten themselves over some game of play ' ; and when he had waited still longer and they yet did not come , he flew into a rage and wished them all turned into ravens . scarcely had he spoken these words when he heard a croaking over his head , and looked up and saw seven ravens as black as coal flying round and round . sorry as he was to see his wish so fulfilled , he did not know how what was done could be undone , and comforted himself as well as he could for the loss of his seven sons with his dear little daughter , who soon became stronger and every day more beautiful . for a long time she did not know that she had ever had any brothers ; for her father and mother took care not to speak of them before her : but one day by chance she heard the people about her speak of them . ' yes , ' said they , ' she is beautiful indeed , but still ' tis a pity that her brothers should have been lost for her sake . ' then she was much grieved , and went to her father and mother , and asked if she had any brothers , and what had become of them . so they dared no longer hide the truth from her , but said it was the will of heaven , and that her birth was only the innocent cause of it ; but the little girl mourned sadly about it every day , and thought herself bound to do all she could to bring her brothers back ; and she had neither rest nor ease , till at length one day she stole away , and set out into the wide world to find her brothers , wherever they might be , and free them , whatever it might cost her . she took nothing with her but a little ring which her father and mother had given her , a loaf of bread in case she should be hungry , a little pitcher of water in case she should be thirsty , and a little stool to rest upon when she should be weary . thus she went on and on , and journeyed till she came to the world ' s end ; then she came to the sun , but the sun looked much too hot and fiery ; so she ran away quickly to the moon , but the moon was cold and chilly , and said , ' i smell flesh and blood this way ! ' so she took herself away in a hurry and came to the stars , and the stars were friendly and kind to her , and each star sat upon his own little stool ; but the morning star rose up and gave her a little piece of wood , and said , ' if you have not this little piece of wood , you cannot unlock the castle that stands on the glass-mountain , and there your brothers live . ' the little girl took the piece of wood , rolled it up in a little cloth , and went on again until she came to the glass-mountain , and found the door shut . then she felt for the little piece of wood ; but when she unwrapped the cloth it was not there , and she saw she had lost the gift of the good stars . what was to be done ? she wanted to save her brothers , and had no key of the castle of the glass-mountain ; so this faithful little sister took a knife out of her pocket and cut off her little finger , that was just the size of the piece of wood she had lost , and put it in the door and opened it . as she went in , a little dwarf came up to her , and said , ' what are you seeking for ? ' ' i seek for my brothers , the seven ravens , ' answered she . then the dwarf said , ' my masters are not at home ; but if you will wait till they come , pray step in . ' now the little dwarf was getting their dinner ready , and he brought their food upon seven little plates , and their drink in seven little glasses , and set them upon the table , and out of each little plate their sister ate a small piece , and out of each little glass she drank a small drop ; but she let the ring that she had brought with her fall into the last glass . on a sudden she heard a fluttering and croaking in the air , and the dwarf said , ' here come my masters . ' when they came in , they wanted to eat and drink , and looked for their little plates and glasses . then said one after the other , ' who has eaten from my little plate ? and who has been drinking out of my little glass ? ' ' caw ! caw ! well i ween mortal lips have this way been . ' when the seventh came to the bottom of his glass , and found there the ring , he looked at it , and knew that it was his father ' s and mother ' s , and said , ' o that our little sister would but come ! then we should be free . ' when the little girl heard this ( for she stood behind the door all the time and listened ) , she ran forward , and in an instant all the ravens took their right form again ; and all hugged and kissed each other , and went merrily home .