there was once a miller who had one beautiful daughter , and as she was grown up , he was anxious that she should be well married and provided for . he said to himself , ' i will give her to the first suitable man who comes and asks for her hand . ' not long after a suitor appeared , and as he appeared to be very rich and the miller could see nothing in him with which to find fault , he betrothed his daughter to him . but the girl did not care for the man as a girl ought to care for her betrothed husband . she did not feel that she could trust him , and she could not look at him nor think of him without an inward shudder . one day he said to her , ' you have not yet paid me a visit , although we have been betrothed for some time . ' ' i do not know where your house is , ' she answered . ' my house is out there in the dark forest , ' he said . she tried to excuse herself by saying that she would not be able to find the way thither . her betrothed only replied , ' you must come and see me next sunday ; i have already invited guests for that day , and that you may not mistake the way , i will strew ashes along the path . ' when sunday came , and it was time for the girl to start , a feeling of dread came over her which she could not explain , and that she might be able to find her path again , she filled her pockets with peas and lentils to sprinkle on the ground as she went along . on reaching the entrance to the forest she found the path strewed with ashes , and these she followed , throwing down some peas on either side of her at every step she took . she walked the whole day until she came to the deepest , darkest part of the forest . there she saw a lonely house , looking so grim and mysterious , that it did not please her at all . she stepped inside , but not a soul was to be seen , and a great silence reigned throughout . suddenly a voice cried : ' turn back , turn back , young maiden fair , linger not in this murderers ' lair . ' the girl looked up and saw that the voice came from a bird hanging in a cage on the wall . again it cried : ' turn back , turn back , young maiden fair , linger not in this murderers ' lair . ' the girl passed on , going from room to room of the house , but they were all empty , and still she saw no one . at last she came to the cellar , and there sat a very , very old woman , who could not keep her head from shaking . ' can you tell me , ' asked the girl , ' if my betrothed husband lives here ? ' ' ah , you poor child , ' answered the old woman , ' what a place for you to come to ! this is a murderers ' den . you think yourself a promised bride , and that your marriage will soon take place , but it is with death that you will keep your marriage feast . look , do you see that large cauldron of water which i am obliged to keep on the fire ! as soon as they have you in their power they will kill you without mercy , and cook and eat you , for they are eaters of men . if i did not take pity on you and save you , you would be lost . ' thereupon the old woman led her behind a large cask , which quite hid her from view . ' keep as still as a mouse , ' she said ; ' do not move or speak , or it will be all over with you . tonight , when the robbers are all asleep , we will flee together . i have long been waiting for an opportunity to escape . ' the words were hardly out of her mouth when the godless crew returned , dragging another young girl along with them . they were all drunk , and paid no heed to her cries and lamentations . they gave her wine to drink , three glasses full , one of white wine , one of red , and one of yellow , and with that her heart gave way and she died . then they tore off her dainty clothing , laid her on a table , and cut her beautiful body into pieces , and sprinkled salt upon it . the poor betrothed girl crouched trembling and shuddering behind the cask , for she saw what a terrible fate had been intended for her by the robbers . one of them now noticed a gold ring still remaining on the little finger of the murdered girl , and as he could not draw it off easily , he took a hatchet and cut off the finger ; but the finger sprang into the air , and fell behind the cask into the lap of the girl who was hiding there . the robber took a light and began looking for it , but he could not find it . ' have you looked behind the large cask ? ' said one of the others . but the old woman called out , ' come and eat your suppers , and let the thing be till tomorrow ; the finger won ' t run away . ' ' the old woman is right , ' said the robbers , and they ceased looking for the finger and sat down . the old woman then mixed a sleeping draught with their wine , and before long they were all lying on the floor of the cellar , fast asleep and snoring . as soon as the girl was assured of this , she came from behind the cask . she was obliged to step over the bodies of the sleepers , who were lying close together , and every moment she was filled with renewed dread lest she should awaken them . but god helped her , so that she passed safely over them , and then she and the old woman went upstairs , opened the door , and hastened as fast as they could from the murderers ' den . they found the ashes scattered by the wind , but the peas and lentils had sprouted , and grown sufficiently above the ground , to guide them in the moonlight along the path . all night long they walked , and it was morning before they reached the mill . then the girl told her father all that had happened . the day came that had been fixed for the marriage . the bridegroom arrived and also a large company of guests , for the miller had taken care to invite all his friends and relations . as they sat at the feast , each guest in turn was asked to tell a tale ; the bride sat still and did not say a word . ' and you , my love , ' said the bridegroom , turning to her , ' is there no tale you know ? tell us something . ' ' i will tell you a dream , then , ' said the bride . ' i went alone through a forest and came at last to a house ; not a soul could i find within , but a bird that was hanging in a cage on the wall cried : ' turn back , turn back , young maiden fair , linger not in this murderers ' lair . ' and again a second time it said these words . ' ' my darling , this is only a dream . ' ' i went on through the house from room to room , but they were all empty , and everything was so grim and mysterious . at last i went down to the cellar , and there sat a very , very old woman , who could not keep her head still . i asked her if my betrothed lived here , and she answered , " ah , you poor child , you are come to a murderers ' den ; your betrothed does indeed live here , but he will kill you without mercy and afterwards cook and eat you . " ' ' my darling , this is only a dream . ' ' the old woman hid me behind a large cask , and scarcely had she done this when the robbers returned home , dragging a young girl along with them . they gave her three kinds of wine to drink , white , red , and yellow , and with that she died . ' ' my darling , this is only a dream . ' ' then they tore off her dainty clothing , and cut her beautiful body into pieces and sprinkled salt upon it . ' ' my darling , this is only a dream . ' ' and one of the robbers saw that there was a gold ring still left on her finger , and as it was difficult to draw off , he took a hatchet and cut off her finger ; but the finger sprang into the air and fell behind the great cask into my lap . and here is the finger with the ring . ' and with these words the bride drew forth the finger and shewed it to the assembled guests . the bridegroom , who during this recital had grown deadly pale , up and tried to escape , but the guests seized him and held him fast . they delivered him up to justice , and he and all his murderous band were condemned to death for their wicked deeds .