a king and queen once upon a time reigned in a country a great way off , where there were in those days fairies . now this king and queen had plenty of money , and plenty of fine clothes to wear , and plenty of good things to eat and drink , and a coach to ride out in every day : but though they had been married many years they had no children , and this grieved them very much indeed . but one day as the queen was walking by the side of the river , at the bottom of the garden , she saw a poor little fish , that had thrown itself out of the water , and lay gasping and nearly dead on the bank . then the queen took pity on the little fish , and threw it back again into the river ; and before it swam away it lifted its head out of the water and said , ' i know what your wish is , and it shall be fulfilled , in return for your kindness to me--you will soon have a daughter . ' what the little fish had foretold soon came to pass ; and the queen had a little girl , so very beautiful that the king could not cease looking on it for joy , and said he would hold a great feast and make merry , and show the child to all the land . so he asked his kinsmen , and nobles , and friends , and neighbours . but the queen said , ' i will have the fairies also , that they might be kind and good to our little daughter . ' now there were thirteen fairies in the kingdom ; but as the king and queen had only twelve golden dishes for them to eat out of , they were forced to leave one of the fairies without asking her . so twelve fairies came , each with a high red cap on her head , and red shoes with high heels on her feet , and a long white wand in her hand : and after the feast was over they gathered round in a ring and gave all their best gifts to the little princess . one gave her goodness , another beauty , another riches , and so on till she had all that was good in the world . just as eleven of them had done blessing her , a great noise was heard in the courtyard , and word was brought that the thirteenth fairy was come , with a black cap on her head , and black shoes on her feet , and a broomstick in her hand : and presently up she came into the dining-hall . now , as she had not been asked to the feast she was very angry , and scolded the king and queen very much , and set to work to take her revenge . so she cried out , ' the king ' s daughter shall , in her fifteenth year , be wounded by a spindle , and fall down dead . ' then the twelfth of the friendly fairies , who had not yet given her gift , came forward , and said that the evil wish must be fulfilled , but that she could soften its mischief ; so her gift was , that the king ' s daughter , when the spindle wounded her , should not really die , but should only fall asleep for a hundred years . however , the king hoped still to save his dear child altogether from the threatened evil ; so he ordered that all the spindles in the kingdom should be bought up and burnt . but all the gifts of the first eleven fairies were in the meantime fulfilled ; for the princess was so beautiful , and well behaved , and good , and wise , that everyone who knew her loved her . it happened that , on the very day she was fifteen years old , the king and queen were not at home , and she was left alone in the palace . so she roved about by herself , and looked at all the rooms and chambers , till at last she came to an old tower , to which there was a narrow staircase ending with a little door . in the door there was a golden key , and when she turned it the door sprang open , and there sat an old lady spinning away very busily . ' why , how now , good mother , ' said the princess ; ' what are you doing there ? ' ' spinning , ' said the old lady , and nodded her head , humming a tune , while buzz ! went the wheel . ' how prettily that little thing turns round ! ' said the princess , and took the spindle and began to try and spin . but scarcely had she touched it , before the fairy ' s prophecy was fulfilled ; the spindle wounded her , and she fell down lifeless on the ground . however , she was not dead , but had only fallen into a deep sleep ; and the king and the queen , who had just come home , and all their court , fell asleep too ; and the horses slept in the stables , and the dogs in the court , the pigeons on the house-top , and the very flies slept upon the walls . even the fire on the hearth left off blazing , and went to sleep ; the jack stopped , and the spit that was turning about with a goose upon it for the king ' s dinner stood still ; and the cook , who was at that moment pulling the kitchen-boy by the hair to give him a box on the ear for something he had done amiss , let him go , and both fell asleep ; the butler , who was slyly tasting the ale , fell asleep with the jug at his lips : and thus everything stood still , and slept soundly . a large hedge of thorns soon grew round the palace , and every year it became higher and thicker ; till at last the old palace was surrounded and hidden , so that not even the roof or the chimneys could be seen . but there went a report through all the land of the beautiful sleeping briar rose ( for so the king ' s daughter was called ) : so that , from time to time , several kings ' sons came , and tried to break through the thicket into the palace . this , however , none of them could ever do ; for the thorns and bushes laid hold of them , as it were with hands ; and there they stuck fast , and died wretchedly . after many , many years there came a king ' s son into that land : and an old man told him the story of the thicket of thorns ; and how a beautiful palace stood behind it , and how a wonderful princess , called briar rose , lay in it asleep , with all her court . he told , too , how he had heard from his grandfather that many , many princes had come , and had tried to break through the thicket , but that they had all stuck fast in it , and died . then the young prince said , ' all this shall not frighten me ; i will go and see this briar rose . ' the old man tried to hinder him , but he was bent upon going . now that very day the hundred years were ended ; and as the prince came to the thicket he saw nothing but beautiful flowering shrubs , through which he went with ease , and they shut in after him as thick as ever . then he came at last to the palace , and there in the court lay the dogs asleep ; and the horses were standing in the stables ; and on the roof sat the pigeons fast asleep , with their heads under their wings . and when he came into the palace , the flies were sleeping on the walls ; the spit was standing still ; the butler had the jug of ale at his lips , going to drink a draught ; the maid sat with a fowl in her lap ready to be plucked ; and the cook in the kitchen was still holding up her hand , as if she was going to beat the boy . then he went on still farther , and all was so still that he could hear every breath he drew ; till at last he came to the old tower , and opened the door of the little room in which briar rose was ; and there she lay , fast asleep on a couch by the window . she looked so beautiful that he could not take his eyes off her , so he stooped down and gave her a kiss . but the moment he kissed her she opened her eyes and awoke , and smiled upon him ; and they went out together ; and soon the king and queen also awoke , and all the court , and gazed on each other with great wonder . and the horses shook themselves , and the dogs jumped up and barked ; the pigeons took their heads from under their wings , and looked about and flew into the fields ; the flies on the walls buzzed again ; the fire in the kitchen blazed up ; round went the jack , and round went the spit , with the goose for the king ' s dinner upon it ; the butler finished his draught of ale ; the maid went on plucking the fowl ; and the cook gave the boy the box on his ear . and then the prince and briar rose were married , and the wedding feast was given ; and they lived happily together all their lives long .