there was once a merchant who had only one child , a son , that was very young , and barely able to run alone . he had two richly laden ships then making a voyage upon the seas , in which he had embarked all his wealth , in the hope of making great gains , when the news came that both were lost . thus from being a rich man he became all at once so very poor that nothing was left to him but one small plot of land ; and there he often went in an evening to take his walk , and ease his mind of a little of his trouble . one day , as he was roaming along in a brown study , thinking with no great comfort on what he had been and what he now was , and was like to be , all on a sudden there stood before him a little , rough-looking , black dwarf . ' prithee , friend , why so sorrowful ? ' said he to the merchant ; ' what is it you take so deeply to heart ? ' ' if you would do me any good i would willingly tell you , ' said the merchant . ' who knows but i may ? ' said the little man : ' tell me what ails you , and perhaps you will find i may be of some use . ' then the merchant told him how all his wealth was gone to the bottom of the sea , and how he had nothing left but that little plot of land . ' oh , trouble not yourself about that , ' said the dwarf ; ' only undertake to bring me here , twelve years hence , whatever meets you first on your going home , and i will give you as much as you please . ' the merchant thought this was no great thing to ask ; that it would most likely be his dog or his cat , or something of that sort , but forgot his little boy heinel ; so he agreed to the bargain , and signed and sealed the bond to do what was asked of him . but as he drew near home , his little boy was so glad to see him that he crept behind him , and laid fast hold of his legs , and looked up in his face and laughed . then the father started , trembling with fear and horror , and saw what it was that he had bound himself to do ; but as no gold was come , he made himself easy by thinking that it was only a joke that the dwarf was playing him , and that , at any rate , when the money came , he should see the bearer , and would not take it in . about a month afterwards he went upstairs into a lumber-room to look for some old iron , that he might sell it and raise a little money ; and there , instead of his iron , he saw a large pile of gold lying on the floor . at the sight of this he was overjoyed , and forgetting all about his son , went into trade again , and became a richer merchant than before . meantime little heinel grew up , and as the end of the twelve years drew near the merchant began to call to mind his bond , and became very sad and thoughtful ; so that care and sorrow were written upon his face . the boy one day asked what was the matter , but his father would not tell for some time ; at last , however , he said that he had , without knowing it , sold him for gold to a little , ugly-looking , black dwarf , and that the twelve years were coming round when he must keep his word . then heinel said , ' father , give yourself very little trouble about that ; i shall be too much for the little man . ' when the time came , the father and son went out together to the place agreed upon : and the son drew a circle on the ground , and set himself and his father in the middle of it . the little black dwarf soon came , and walked round and round about the circle , but could not find any way to get into it , and he either could not , or dared not , jump over it . at last the boy said to him . ' have you anything to say to us , my friend , or what do you want ? ' now heinel had found a friend in a good fairy , that was fond of him , and had told him what to do ; for this fairy knew what good luck was in store for him . ' have you brought me what you said you would ? ' said the dwarf to the merchant . the old man held his tongue , but heinel said again , ' what do you want here ? ' the dwarf said , ' i come to talk with your father , not with you . ' ' you have cheated and taken in my father , ' said the son ; ' pray give him up his bond at once . ' ' fair and softly , ' said the little old man ; ' right is right ; i have paid my money , and your father has had it , and spent it ; so be so good as to let me have what i paid it for . ' ' you must have my consent to that first , ' said heinel , ' so please to step in here , and let us talk it over . ' the old man grinned , and showed his teeth , as if he should have been very glad to get into the circle if he could . then at last , after a long talk , they came to terms . heinel agreed that his father must give him up , and that so far the dwarf should have his way : but , on the other hand , the fairy had told heinel what fortune was in store for him , if he followed his own course ; and he did not choose to be given up to his hump-backed friend , who seemed so anxious for his company . so , to make a sort of drawn battle of the matter , it was settled that heinel should be put into an open boat , that lay on the sea-shore hard by ; that the father should push him off with his own hand , and that he should thus be set adrift , and left to the bad or good luck of wind and weather . then he took leave of his father , and set himself in the boat , but before it got far off a wave struck it , and it fell with one side low in the water , so the merchant thought that poor heinel was lost , and went home very sorrowful , while the dwarf went his way , thinking that at any rate he had had his revenge . the boat , however , did not sink , for the good fairy took care of her friend , and soon raised the boat up again , and it went safely on . the young man sat safe within , till at length it ran ashore upon an unknown land . as he jumped upon the shore he saw before him a beautiful castle but empty and dreary within , for it was enchanted . ' here , ' said he to himself , ' must i find the prize the good fairy told me of . ' so he once more searched the whole palace through , till at last he found a white snake , lying coiled up on a cushion in one of the chambers . now the white snake was an enchanted princess ; and she was very glad to see him , and said , ' are you at last come to set me free ? twelve long years have i waited here for the fairy to bring you hither as she promised , for you alone can save me . this night twelve men will come : their faces will be black , and they will be dressed in chain armour . they will ask what you do here , but give no answer ; and let them do what they will--beat , whip , pinch , prick , or torment you--bear all ; only speak not a word , and at twelve o ' clock they must go away . the second night twelve others will come : and the third night twenty-four , who will even cut off your head ; but at the twelfth hour of that night their power is gone , and i shall be free , and will come and bring you the water of life , and will wash you with it , and bring you back to life and health . ' and all came to pass as she had said ; heinel bore all , and spoke not a word ; and the third night the princess came , and fell on his neck and kissed him . joy and gladness burst forth throughout the castle , the wedding was celebrated , and he was crowned king of the golden mountain . they lived together very happily , and the queen had a son . and thus eight years had passed over their heads , when the king thought of his father ; and he began to long to see him once again . but the queen was against his going , and said , ' i know well that misfortunes will come upon us if you go . ' however , he gave her no rest till she agreed . at his going away she gave him a wishing-ring , and said , ' take this ring , and put it on your finger ; whatever you wish it will bring you ; only promise never to make use of it to bring me hence to your father ' s house . ' then he said he would do what she asked , and put the ring on his finger , and wished himself near the town where his father lived . heinel found himself at the gates in a moment ; but the guards would not let him go in , because he was so strangely clad . so he went up to a neighbouring hill , where a shepherd dwelt , and borrowed his old frock , and thus passed unknown into the town . when he came to his father ' s house , he said he was his son ; but the merchant would not believe him , and said he had had but one son , his poor heinel , who he knew was long since dead : and as he was only dressed like a poor shepherd , he would not even give him anything to eat . the king , however , still vowed that he was his son , and said , ' is there no mark by which you would know me if i am really your son ? ' ' yes , ' said his mother , ' our heinel had a mark like a raspberry on his right arm . ' then he showed them the mark , and they knew that what he had said was true . he next told them how he was king of the golden mountain , and was married to a princess , and had a son seven years old . but the merchant said , ' that can never be true ; he must be a fine king truly who travels about in a shepherd ' s frock ! ' at this the son was vexed ; and forgetting his word , turned his ring , and wished for his queen and son . in an instant they stood before him ; but the queen wept , and said he had broken his word , and bad luck would follow . he did all he could to soothe her , and she at last seemed to be appeased ; but she was not so in truth , and was only thinking how she should punish him . one day he took her to walk with him out of the town , and showed her the spot where the boat was set adrift upon the wide waters . then he sat himself down , and said , ' i am very much tired ; sit by me , i will rest my head in your lap , and sleep a while . ' as soon as he had fallen asleep , however , she drew the ring from his finger , and crept softly away , and wished herself and her son at home in their kingdom . and when he awoke he found himself alone , and saw that the ring was gone from his finger . ' i can never go back to my father ' s house , ' said he ; ' they would say i am a sorcerer : i will journey forth into the world , till i come again to my kingdom . ' so saying he set out and travelled till he came to a hill , where three giants were sharing their father ' s goods ; and as they saw him pass they cried out and said , ' little men have sharp wits ; he shall part the goods between us . ' now there was a sword that cut off an enemy ' s head whenever the wearer gave the words , ' heads off ! ' ; a cloak that made the owner invisible , or gave him any form he pleased ; and a pair of boots that carried the wearer wherever he wished . heinel said they must first let him try these wonderful things , then he might know how to set a value upon them . then they gave him the cloak , and he wished himself a fly , and in a moment he was a fly . ' the cloak is very well , ' said he : ' now give me the sword . ' ' no , ' said they ; ' not unless you undertake not to say , " heads off ! " for if you do we are all dead men . ' so they gave it him , charging him to try it on a tree . he next asked for the boots also ; and the moment he had all three in his power , he wished himself at the golden mountain ; and there he was at once . so the giants were left behind with no goods to share or quarrel about . as heinel came near his castle he heard the sound of merry music ; and the people around told him that his queen was about to marry another husband . then he threw his cloak around him , and passed through the castle hall , and placed himself by the side of the queen , where no one saw him . but when anything to eat was put upon her plate , he took it away and ate it himself ; and when a glass of wine was handed to her , he took it and drank it ; and thus , though they kept on giving her meat and drink , her plate and cup were always empty . upon this , fear and remorse came over her , and she went into her chamber alone , and sat there weeping ; and he followed her there . ' alas ! ' said she to herself , ' was i not once set free ? why then does this enchantment still seem to bind me ? ' ' false and fickle one ! ' said he . ' one indeed came who set thee free , and he is now near thee again ; but how have you used him ? ought he to have had such treatment from thee ? ' then he went out and sent away the company , and said the wedding was at an end , for that he was come back to the kingdom . but the princes , peers , and great men mocked at him . however , he would enter into no parley with them , but only asked them if they would go in peace or not . then they turned upon him and tried to seize him ; but he drew his sword . ' heads off ! ' cried he ; and with the word the traitors ' heads fell before him , and heinel was once more king of the golden mountain .