hard by a great forest dwelt a poor wood-cutter with his wife and his two children . the boy was called hansel and the girl gretel . he had little to bite and to break , and once when great dearth fell on the land , he could no longer procure even daily bread . now when he thought over this by night in his bed , and tossed about in his anxiety , he groaned and said to his wife : ' what is to become of us ? how are we to feed our poor children , when we no longer have anything even for ourselves ? ' ' i ' ll tell you what , husband , ' answered the woman , ' early tomorrow morning we will take the children out into the forest to where it is the thickest ; there we will light a fire for them , and give each of them one more piece of bread , and then we will go to our work and leave them alone . they will not find the way home again , and we shall be rid of them . ' ' no , wife , ' said the man , ' i will not do that ; how can i bear to leave my children alone in the forest ? --the wild animals would soon come and tear them to pieces . ' ' o , you fool ! ' said she , ' then we must all four die of hunger , you may as well plane the planks for our coffins , ' and she left him no peace until he consented . ' but i feel very sorry for the poor children , all the same , ' said the man . the two children had also not been able to sleep for hunger , and had heard what their stepmother had said to their father . gretel wept bitter tears , and said to hansel : ' now all is over with us . ' ' be quiet , gretel , ' said hansel , ' do not distress yourself , i will soon find a way to help us . ' and when the old folks had fallen asleep , he got up , put on his little coat , opened the door below , and crept outside . the moon shone brightly , and the white pebbles which lay in front of the house glittered like real silver pennies . hansel stooped and stuffed the little pocket of his coat with as many as he could get in . then he went back and said to gretel : ' be comforted , dear little sister , and sleep in peace , god will not forsake us , ' and he lay down again in his bed . when day dawned , but before the sun had risen , the woman came and awoke the two children , saying : ' get up , you sluggards ! we are going into the forest to fetch wood . ' she gave each a little piece of bread , and said : ' there is something for your dinner , but do not eat it up before then , for you will get nothing else . ' gretel took the bread under her apron , as hansel had the pebbles in his pocket . then they all set out together on the way to the forest . when they had walked a short time , hansel stood still and peeped back at the house , and did so again and again . his father said : ' hansel , what are you looking at there and staying behind for ? pay attention , and do not forget how to use your legs . ' ' ah , father , ' said hansel , ' i am looking at my little white cat , which is sitting up on the roof , and wants to say goodbye to me . ' the wife said : ' fool , that is not your little cat , that is the morning sun which is shining on the chimneys . ' hansel , however , had not been looking back at the cat , but had been constantly throwing one of the white pebble-stones out of his pocket on the road . when they had reached the middle of the forest , the father said : ' now , children , pile up some wood , and i will light a fire that you may not be cold . ' hansel and gretel gathered brushwood together , as high as a little hill . the brushwood was lighted , and when the flames were burning very high , the woman said : ' now , children , lay yourselves down by the fire and rest , we will go into the forest and cut some wood . when we have done , we will come back and fetch you away . ' hansel and gretel sat by the fire , and when noon came , each ate a little piece of bread , and as they heard the strokes of the wood-axe they believed that their father was near . it was not the axe , however , but a branch which he had fastened to a withered tree which the wind was blowing backwards and forwards . and as they had been sitting such a long time , their eyes closed with fatigue , and they fell fast asleep . when at last they awoke , it was already dark night . gretel began to cry and said : ' how are we to get out of the forest now ? ' but hansel comforted her and said : ' just wait a little , until the moon has risen , and then we will soon find the way . ' and when the full moon had risen , hansel took his little sister by the hand , and followed the pebbles which shone like newly-coined silver pieces , and showed them the way . they walked the whole night long , and by break of day came once more to their father ' s house . they knocked at the door , and when the woman opened it and saw that it was hansel and gretel , she said : ' you naughty children , why have you slept so long in the forest ? --we thought you were never coming back at all ! ' the father , however , rejoiced , for it had cut him to the heart to leave them behind alone . not long afterwards , there was once more great dearth throughout the land , and the children heard their mother saying at night to their father : ' everything is eaten again , we have one half loaf left , and that is the end . the children must go , we will take them farther into the wood , so that they will not find their way out again ; there is no other means of saving ourselves ! ' the man ' s heart was heavy , and he thought : ' it would be better for you to share the last mouthful with your children . ' the woman , however , would listen to nothing that he had to say , but scolded and reproached him . he who says a must say b , likewise , and as he had yielded the first time , he had to do so a second time also . the children , however , were still awake and had heard the conversation . when the old folks were asleep , hansel again got up , and wanted to go out and pick up pebbles as he had done before , but the woman had locked the door , and hansel could not get out . nevertheless he comforted his little sister , and said : ' do not cry , gretel , go to sleep quietly , the good god will help us . ' early in the morning came the woman , and took the children out of their beds . their piece of bread was given to them , but it was still smaller than the time before . on the way into the forest hansel crumbled his in his pocket , and often stood still and threw a morsel on the ground . ' hansel , why do you stop and look round ? ' said the father , ' go on . ' ' i am looking back at my little pigeon which is sitting on the roof , and wants to say goodbye to me , ' answered hansel . ' fool ! ' said the woman , ' that is not your little pigeon , that is the morning sun that is shining on the chimney . ' hansel , however little by little , threw all the crumbs on the path . the woman led the children still deeper into the forest , where they had never in their lives been before . then a great fire was again made , and the mother said : ' just sit there , you children , and when you are tired you may sleep a little ; we are going into the forest to cut wood , and in the evening when we are done , we will come and fetch you away . ' when it was noon , gretel shared her piece of bread with hansel , who had scattered his by the way . then they fell asleep and evening passed , but no one came to the poor children . they did not awake until it was dark night , and hansel comforted his little sister and said : ' just wait , gretel , until the moon rises , and then we shall see the crumbs of bread which i have strewn about , they will show us our way home again . ' when the moon came they set out , but they found no crumbs , for the many thousands of birds which fly about in the woods and fields had picked them all up . hansel said to gretel : ' we shall soon find the way , ' but they did not find it . they walked the whole night and all the next day too from morning till evening , but they did not get out of the forest , and were very hungry , for they had nothing to eat but two or three berries , which grew on the ground . and as they were so weary that their legs would carry them no longer , they lay down beneath a tree and fell asleep . it was now three mornings since they had left their father ' s house . they began to walk again , but they always came deeper into the forest , and if help did not come soon , they must die of hunger and weariness . when it was mid-day , they saw a beautiful snow-white bird sitting on a bough , which sang so delightfully that they stood still and listened to it . and when its song was over , it spread its wings and flew away before them , and they followed it until they reached a little house , on the roof of which it alighted ; and when they approached the little house they saw that it was built of bread and covered with cakes , but that the windows were of clear sugar . ' we will set to work on that , ' said hansel , ' and have a good meal . i will eat a bit of the roof , and you gretel , can eat some of the window , it will taste sweet . ' hansel reached up above , and broke off a little of the roof to try how it tasted , and gretel leant against the window and nibbled at the panes . then a soft voice cried from the parlour : ' nibble , nibble , gnaw , who is nibbling at my little house ? ' the children answered : ' the wind , the wind , the heaven-born wind , ' and went on eating without disturbing themselves . hansel , who liked the taste of the roof , tore down a great piece of it , and gretel pushed out the whole of one round window-pane , sat down , and enjoyed herself with it . suddenly the door opened , and a woman as old as the hills , who supported herself on crutches , came creeping out . hansel and gretel were so terribly frightened that they let fall what they had in their hands . the old woman , however , nodded her head , and said : ' oh , you dear children , who has brought you here ? do come in , and stay with me . no harm shall happen to you . ' she took them both by the hand , and led them into her little house . then good food was set before them , milk and pancakes , with sugar , apples , and nuts . afterwards two pretty little beds were covered with clean white linen , and hansel and gretel lay down in them , and thought they were in heaven . the old woman had only pretended to be so kind ; she was in reality a wicked witch , who lay in wait for children , and had only built the little house of bread in order to entice them there . when a child fell into her power , she killed it , cooked and ate it , and that was a feast day with her . witches have red eyes , and cannot see far , but they have a keen scent like the beasts , and are aware when human beings draw near . when hansel and gretel came into her neighbourhood , she laughed with malice , and said mockingly : ' i have them , they shall not escape me again ! ' early in the morning before the children were awake , she was already up , and when she saw both of them sleeping and looking so pretty , with their plump and rosy cheeks she muttered to herself : ' that will be a dainty mouthful ! ' then she seized hansel with her shrivelled hand , carried him into a little stable , and locked him in behind a grated door . scream as he might , it would not help him . then she went to gretel , shook her till she awoke , and cried : ' get up , lazy thing , fetch some water , and cook something good for your brother , he is in the stable outside , and is to be made fat . when he is fat , i will eat him . ' gretel began to weep bitterly , but it was all in vain , for she was forced to do what the wicked witch commanded . and now the best food was cooked for poor hansel , but gretel got nothing but crab-shells . every morning the woman crept to the little stable , and cried : ' hansel , stretch out your finger that i may feel if you will soon be fat . ' hansel , however , stretched out a little bone to her , and the old woman , who had dim eyes , could not see it , and thought it was hansel ' s finger , and was astonished that there was no way of fattening him . when four weeks had gone by , and hansel still remained thin , she was seized with impatience and would not wait any longer . ' now , then , gretel , ' she cried to the girl , ' stir yourself , and bring some water . let hansel be fat or lean , tomorrow i will kill him , and cook him . ' ah , how the poor little sister did lament when she had to fetch the water , and how her tears did flow down her cheeks ! ' dear god , do help us , ' she cried . ' if the wild beasts in the forest had but devoured us , we should at any rate have died together . ' ' just keep your noise to yourself , ' said the old woman , ' it won ' t help you at all . ' early in the morning , gretel had to go out and hang up the cauldron with the water , and light the fire . ' we will bake first , ' said the old woman , ' i have already heated the oven , and kneaded the dough . ' she pushed poor gretel out to the oven , from which flames of fire were already darting . ' creep in , ' said the witch , ' and see if it is properly heated , so that we can put the bread in . ' and once gretel was inside , she intended to shut the oven and let her bake in it , and then she would eat her , too . but gretel saw what she had in mind , and said : ' i do not know how i am to do it ; how do i get in ? ' ' silly goose , ' said the old woman . ' the door is big enough ; just look , i can get in myself ! ' and she crept up and thrust her head into the oven . then gretel gave her a push that drove her far into it , and shut the iron door , and fastened the bolt . oh ! then she began to howl quite horribly , but gretel ran away and the godless witch was miserably burnt to death . gretel , however , ran like lightning to hansel , opened his little stable , and cried : ' hansel , we are saved ! the old witch is dead ! ' then hansel sprang like a bird from its cage when the door is opened . how they did rejoice and embrace each other , and dance about and kiss each other ! and as they had no longer any need to fear her , they went into the witch ' s house , and in every corner there stood chests full of pearls and jewels . ' these are far better than pebbles ! ' said hansel , and thrust into his pockets whatever could be got in , and gretel said : ' i , too , will take something home with me , ' and filled her pinafore full . ' but now we must be off , ' said hansel , ' that we may get out of the witch ' s forest . ' when they had walked for two hours , they came to a great stretch of water . ' we cannot cross , ' said hansel , ' i see no foot-plank , and no bridge . ' ' and there is also no ferry , ' answered gretel , ' but a white duck is swimming there : if i ask her , she will help us over . ' then she cried : ' little duck , little duck , dost thou see , hansel and gretel are waiting for thee ? there ' s never a plank , or bridge in sight , take us across on thy back so white . ' the duck came to them , and hansel seated himself on its back , and told his sister to sit by him . ' no , ' replied gretel , ' that will be too heavy for the little duck ; she shall take us across , one after the other . ' the good little duck did so , and when they were once safely across and had walked for a short time , the forest seemed to be more and more familiar to them , and at length they saw from afar their father ' s house . then they began to run , rushed into the parlour , and threw themselves round their father ' s neck . the man had not known one happy hour since he had left the children in the forest ; the woman , however , was dead . gretel emptied her pinafore until pearls and precious stones ran about the room , and hansel threw one handful after another out of his pocket to add to them . then all anxiety was at an end , and they lived together in perfect happiness . my tale is done , there runs a mouse ; whosoever catches it , may make himself a big fur cap out of it .