when old mr fox was dead , the wolf came as a suitor , and knocked at the door , and the cat who was servant to mrs fox , opened it for him . the wolf greeted her , and said : ' good day , mrs cat of kehrewit , how comes it that alone you sit ? what are you making good ? ' the cat replied : ' in milk i ' m breaking bread so sweet , will you be my guest , and eat ? ' ' no , thank you , mrs cat , ' answered the wolf . ' is mrs fox not at home ? ' the cat said : ' she sits upstairs in her room , bewailing her sorrowful doom , bewailing her trouble so sore , for old mr fox is no more . ' the wolf answered : ' if she ' s in want of a husband now , then will it please her to step below ? ' the cat runs quickly up the stair , and lets her tail fly here and there , until she comes to the parlour door . with her five gold rings at the door she knocks : ' are you within , good mistress fox ? if you ' re in want of a husband now , then will it please you to step below ? mrs fox asked : ' has the gentleman red stockings on , and has he a pointed mouth ? ' ' no , ' answered the cat . ' then he won ' t do for me . ' when the wolf was gone , came a dog , a stag , a hare , a bear , a lion , and all the beasts of the forest , one after the other . but one of the good qualities which old mr fox had possessed , was always lacking , and the cat had continually to send the suitors away . at length came a young fox . then mrs fox said : ' has the gentleman red stockings on , and has a little pointed mouth ? ' ' yes , ' said the cat , ' he has . ' ' then let him come upstairs , ' said mrs fox , and ordered the servant to prepare the wedding feast . ' sweep me the room as clean as you can , up with the window , fling out my old man ! for many a fine fat mouse he brought , yet of his wife he never thought , but ate up every one he caught . ' then the wedding was solemnized with young mr fox , and there was much rejoicing and dancing ; and if they have not left off , they are dancing still .