the king of a great land died , and left his queen to take care of their only child . this child was a daughter , who was very beautiful ; and her mother loved her dearly , and was very kind to her . and there was a good fairy too , who was fond of the princess , and helped her mother to watch over her . when she grew up , she was betrothed to a prince who lived a great way off ; and as the time drew near for her to be married , she got ready to set off on her journey to his country . then the queen her mother , packed up a great many costly things ; jewels , and gold , and silver ; trinkets , fine dresses , and in short everything that became a royal bride . and she gave her a waiting-maid to ride with her , and give her into the bridegroom ' s hands ; and each had a horse for the journey . now the princess ' s horse was the fairy ' s gift , and it was called falada , and could speak . when the time came for them to set out , the fairy went into her bed-chamber , and took a little knife , and cut off a lock of her hair , and gave it to the princess , and said , ' take care of it , dear child ; for it is a charm that may be of use to you on the road . ' then they all took a sorrowful leave of the princess ; and she put the lock of hair into her bosom , got upon her horse , and set off on her journey to her bridegroom ' s kingdom . one day , as they were riding along by a brook , the princess began to feel very thirsty : and she said to her maid , ' pray get down , and fetch me some water in my golden cup out of yonder brook , for i want to drink . ' ' nay , ' said the maid , ' if you are thirsty , get off yourself , and stoop down by the water and drink ; i shall not be your waiting-maid any longer . ' then she was so thirsty that she got down , and knelt over the little brook , and drank ; for she was frightened , and dared not bring out her golden cup ; and she wept and said , ' alas ! what will become of me ? ' and the lock answered her , and said : ' alas ! alas ! if thy mother knew it , sadly , sadly , would she rue it . ' but the princess was very gentle and meek , so she said nothing to her maid ' s ill behaviour , but got upon her horse again . then all rode farther on their journey , till the day grew so warm , and the sun so scorching , that the bride began to feel very thirsty again ; and at last , when they came to a river , she forgot her maid ' s rude speech , and said , ' pray get down , and fetch me some water to drink in my golden cup . ' but the maid answered her , and even spoke more haughtily than before : ' drink if you will , but i shall not be your waiting-maid . ' then the princess was so thirsty that she got off her horse , and lay down , and held her head over the running stream , and cried and said , ' what will become of me ? ' and the lock of hair answered her again : ' alas ! alas ! if thy mother knew it , sadly , sadly , would she rue it . ' and as she leaned down to drink , the lock of hair fell from her bosom , and floated away with the water . now she was so frightened that she did not see it ; but her maid saw it , and was very glad , for she knew the charm ; and she saw that the poor bride would be in her power , now that she had lost the hair . so when the bride had done drinking , and would have got upon falada again , the maid said , ' i shall ride upon falada , and you may have my horse instead ' ; so she was forced to give up her horse , and soon afterwards to take off her royal clothes and put on her maid ' s shabby ones . at last , as they drew near the end of their journey , this treacherous servant threatened to kill her mistress if she ever told anyone what had happened . but falada saw it all , and marked it well . then the waiting-maid got upon falada , and the real bride rode upon the other horse , and they went on in this way till at last they came to the royal court . there was great joy at their coming , and the prince flew to meet them , and lifted the maid from her horse , thinking she was the one who was to be his wife ; and she was led upstairs to the royal chamber ; but the true princess was told to stay in the court below . now the old king happened just then to have nothing else to do ; so he amused himself by sitting at his kitchen window , looking at what was going on ; and he saw her in the courtyard . as she looked very pretty , and too delicate for a waiting-maid , he went up into the royal chamber to ask the bride who it was she had brought with her , that was thus left standing in the court below . ' i brought her with me for the sake of her company on the road , ' said she ; ' pray give the girl some work to do , that she may not be idle . ' the old king could not for some time think of any work for her to do ; but at last he said , ' i have a lad who takes care of my geese ; she may go and help him . ' now the name of this lad , that the real bride was to help in watching the king ' s geese , was curdken . but the false bride said to the prince , ' dear husband , pray do me one piece of kindness . ' ' that i will , ' said the prince . ' then tell one of your slaughterers to cut off the head of the horse i rode upon , for it was very unruly , and plagued me sadly on the road ' ; but the truth was , she was very much afraid lest falada should some day or other speak , and tell all she had done to the princess . she carried her point , and the faithful falada was killed ; but when the true princess heard of it , she wept , and begged the man to nail up falada ' s head against a large dark gate of the city , through which she had to pass every morning and evening , that there she might still see him sometimes . then the slaughterer said he would do as she wished ; and cut off the head , and nailed it up under the dark gate . early the next morning , as she and curdken went out through the gate , she said sorrowfully : ' falada , falada , there thou hangest ! ' and the head answered : ' bride , bride , there thou gangest ! alas ! alas ! if thy mother knew it , sadly , sadly , would she rue it . ' then they went out of the city , and drove the geese on . and when she came to the meadow , she sat down upon a bank there , and let down her waving locks of hair , which were all of pure silver ; and when curdken saw it glitter in the sun , he ran up , and would have pulled some of the locks out , but she cried : ' blow , breezes , blow ! let curdken ' s hat go ! blow , breezes , blow ! let him after it go ! o ' er hills , dales , and rocks , away be it whirl ' d till the silvery locks are all comb ' d and curl ' d ! then there came a wind , so strong that it blew off curdken ' s hat ; and away it flew over the hills : and he was forced to turn and run after it ; till , by the time he came back , she had done combing and curling her hair , and had put it up again safe . then he was very angry and sulky , and would not speak to her at all ; but they watched the geese until it grew dark in the evening , and then drove them homewards . the next morning , as they were going through the dark gate , the poor girl looked up at falada ' s head , and cried : ' falada , falada , there thou hangest ! ' and the head answered : ' bride , bride , there thou gangest ! alas ! alas ! if thy mother knew it , sadly , sadly , would she rue it . ' then she drove on the geese , and sat down again in the meadow , and began to comb out her hair as before ; and curdken ran up to her , and wanted to take hold of it ; but she cried out quickly : ' blow , breezes , blow ! let curdken ' s hat go ! blow , breezes , blow ! let him after it go ! o ' er hills , dales , and rocks , away be it whirl ' d till the silvery locks are all comb ' d and curl ' d ! then the wind came and blew away his hat ; and off it flew a great way , over the hills and far away , so that he had to run after it ; and when he came back she had bound up her hair again , and all was safe . so they watched the geese till it grew dark . in the evening , after they came home , curdken went to the old king , and said , ' i cannot have that strange girl to help me to keep the geese any longer . ' ' why ? ' said the king . ' because , instead of doing any good , she does nothing but tease me all day long . ' then the king made him tell him what had happened . and curdken said , ' when we go in the morning through the dark gate with our flock of geese , she cries and talks with the head of a horse that hangs upon the wall , and says : ' falada , falada , there thou hangest ! ' and the head answers : ' bride , bride , there thou gangest ! alas ! alas ! if thy mother knew it , sadly , sadly , would she rue it . ' and curdken went on telling the king what had happened upon the meadow where the geese fed ; how his hat was blown away ; and how he was forced to run after it , and to leave his flock of geese to themselves . but the old king told the boy to go out again the next day : and when morning came , he placed himself behind the dark gate , and heard how she spoke to falada , and how falada answered . then he went into the field , and hid himself in a bush by the meadow ' s side ; and he soon saw with his own eyes how they drove the flock of geese ; and how , after a little time , she let down her hair that glittered in the sun . and then he heard her say : ' blow , breezes , blow ! let curdken ' s hat go ! blow , breezes , blow ! let him after it go ! o ' er hills , dales , and rocks , away be it whirl ' d till the silvery locks are all comb ' d and curl ' d ! and soon came a gale of wind , and carried away curdken ' s hat , and away went curdken after it , while the girl went on combing and curling her hair . all this the old king saw : so he went home without being seen ; and when the little goose-girl came back in the evening he called her aside , and asked her why she did so : but she burst into tears , and said , ' that i must not tell you or any man , or i shall lose my life . ' but the old king begged so hard , that she had no peace till she had told him all the tale , from beginning to end , word for word . and it was very lucky for her that she did so , for when she had done the king ordered royal clothes to be put upon her , and gazed on her with wonder , she was so beautiful . then he called his son and told him that he had only a false bride ; for that she was merely a waiting-maid , while the true bride stood by . and the young king rejoiced when he saw her beauty , and heard how meek and patient she had been ; and without saying anything to the false bride , the king ordered a great feast to be got ready for all his court . the bridegroom sat at the top , with the false princess on one side , and the true one on the other ; but nobody knew her again , for her beauty was quite dazzling to their eyes ; and she did not seem at all like the little goose-girl , now that she had her brilliant dress on . when they had eaten and drank , and were very merry , the old king said he would tell them a tale . so he began , and told all the story of the princess , as if it was one that he had once heard ; and he asked the true waiting-maid what she thought ought to be done to anyone who would behave thus . ' nothing better , ' said this false bride , ' than that she should be thrown into a cask stuck round with sharp nails , and that two white horses should be put to it , and should drag it from street to street till she was dead . ' ' thou art she ! ' said the old king ; ' and as thou has judged thyself , so shall it be done to thee . ' and the young king was then married to his true wife , and they reigned over the kingdom in peace and happiness all their lives ; and the good fairy came to see them , and restored the faithful falada to life again .